The Liar





The Liar





STEPHEN FRY





Copyright © 1991 Stephen Fry



Published by

Soho Press, Inc.

853 Broadway

New York, NY 10003



Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data



Fry, Stephen, 1957-

The liar / Stephen Fry.

p. cm.

ISBN 978-1-56947-012-1

I. Title.

PR6056.R88L5 1993

823' .914—dc2 0 92-4040-7

CIP



The author and publishers are grateful to the

following for permission to use copyright material:



Shakespeare and Tragedy. © John Bayley

quoted by kind permission of Routledge Ltd



"Maria" (Richard Rogers / Oscar Hammerstein II)

© 1959, Williamson Music International, USA

Reproduced by permission of EMI Music Publishing Ltd, London wc2h oea



'Puppy Love' composed by Paul Anka

and reproduced by kind permission of M.A.M. Music Publishing Ltd



'I Don't Know How to Love Him' by Tim Rice

reproduced by kind permission of MCA Music Ltd



Manufactured in the

United States



20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12





To

(insert full name here)





Contents

One

I

II

III

Two

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

Three

I

II

III

IV

Four

I

II

III

IV

Five

Six

Seven

Eight

I

II

Nine

I

II

III

Ten

Eleven

I

II

Twelve

Thirteen

Fourteen

Acknowledgements





Not one word of the following is true





A Fame T-shirt stopped outside the house where Mozart was bom. He looked up at the building and his eyes shone. He stood quite still, gazing upwards and glowing with adoration as a party of Bleached Denims and Fluorescent Bermuda Shorts pushed past him and went in. Then he shook his head, dug into his hip pocket and moved forwards. A thin high voice behind him caused him to stop mid-stride.

''Have you ever contemplated, Adrian, the phenomenon of springs?''

'Coils, you mean?'

'Not coils, Adrian, no. Coils not. Think springs of water. Think wells and spas and sources. Well-springs in the widest and loveliest sense. Jerusalem, for instance, is a spring of religiosity. One small town in the desert, but the source of the world's three most powerful faiths. It is the capital of Judaism, the scene of Christ's crucifixion and the place from which Mohammed ascended into heaven. Religion seems to bubble from its sands.'

The Fame T-shirt smiled to himself and walked into the building.

A Tweed Jacket and a Blue Button-down Shirt of Oxford Cotton stopped in front of the steps. Now it was their turn to stare reverently upwards as the tide of human traffic streamed past them along the Getreidegasse.

'Take Salzburg. By no means the chief city of Austria, but a Jerusalem to any music lover. Haydn, Schubert and . . . oh dear me yes, here we are . . . and Mozart.'

'There's a theory that special lines criss-cross the earth and that where they coincide strange things happen,' said the Oxford Cotton Button-down Shirt. 'Ley-lines, I think they call them.'

'You'll think I'm grinding my axe,' said the Jacket, 'but I should say that it is the German language that is responsible.'

'Shall we go up?'

'By all means.' The pair moved into the interior shadows of the house.

You see,' continued the Tweed, 'all the qualities of ironic abstraction that the language could not articulate found expression in their music. '

'I had never thought of Haydn as ironic.'

'It is of course quite possible that my theory is hopelessly wrong. Pay the nice Frdulein, Adrian.'



In a second-storey chamber where little Wolfgang had romped, whose walls he had covered with precocious arithmetic and whose rafters he had made tremble with infant minuets, the Fame T-shirt examined the display cases.

The ivory and tortoise-shell combs that once had smoothed the ruffled ringlets of the young genius appeared not to interest the T-shirt at all, nor the letters and laundry-lists, nor the child-size violins and violas. His attention was entirely taken up by the models of stage designs which were set into the wall in glass boxes all round the room.

One box in particular seemed to fascinate him. He stared at it with intensity and suspicion as if half expecting the little papier mâché figures inside to burst through the glass and punch him on the nose. He appeared to be oblivious of the group of Bleached Denims and Acid-coloured Shorts that pressed around him, laughing and joking in a language he didn't understand.

The model that so particularly engrossed him was of a banqueting hall in which stood a dining table heaped high with food. Two little men had been placed by the table, one crouched in terror, the other standing with hand on hip, in an attitude of cavalier contempt. Both figures looked upstage at the model of a white statue which pointed down at them with the accusing finger of an Italian traffic policeman or wartime recruiting poster.

The Tweed Jacket and the Blue Button-down had just entered the room.

'You start at that end, Adrian, and well meet in the middle. '

The Jacket watched the Oxford Cotton move to the other end of the room and then approached the cabinet, whose glass was still being misted by the intense scrutiny of the Fame T-shirt.

'Don Giovanni,' said the Tweed coming up behind him, 'a cenar teco m'invitasti, e son venuto. Don Giovanni, you invited me to dinner, and here I am.'

The T-shirt still stared into the glass. "Non si pasce di cibo mortale, Chi si pasce di cibo celeste,' he whispered. 'He who dines on heavenly food has no need of mortal sustenance.'

'I believe you have something for me,' said the Tweed.

'Goldener Hirsch, name of Emburey. Small package.'

'Emburey? Middlesex and England? I had no idea you were interested in cricket.'

'I get it out from a newspaper. It looked a very English name.'

'And so it is. Goodbye.'

The Tweed moved on and joined the Blue Shirt, who had fallen into conversation with a Frenchwoman.

'I was telling this lady,' said the Shirt, 'that I thought the design for The Magic Flute over there was by David Hockney.'

'Certainly so,' said the Tweed. 'Hockney seems to me to paint in two styles. Wild and natural or cold and clinical. I seem to remember remarking that there are two kinds of Hockney. Field Hockney and Ice Hockney.'

'Please?'

'It's a joke,' explained the Blue Shirt.

'Ah.'

The Tweed was examining an exhibit.

'This figure here must be the Queen of the Night, surely.'

'She is a character altogether of the most extraordinary, I believe,' said the Frenchwoman. 'Her music - my God, how but that it is divine. I am myself singer and to play the Queen is the dearest dream of my bosom.'

'It's certainly one hell of a part,' said the Oxford Cotton. 'Pretty difficult I'd have thought. What's that incredibly high note she has to reach? It's a top C, isn't it?'

The Frenchwoman's answer to this question startled not just the Blue Button-down Shirt and his companion, but the whole room. For she stared at the Blue Shirt, her eyes round with fright, opened her mouth wide and let go a piercing soprano note of a purity and passion that she was never to repeat in the whole of her subsequent, and distinguished, operatic career.

'Good lord,' said the Tweed, 'is it really that high? As I remember it'

'Donald!' said the Button-down Shirt. 'Look!'

The Tweed Jacket turned and saw the cause of the scream and the cause of other, less technically proficient, screams that were starting up everywhere.

In the middle of the room stood a man in a Fame T-shirt, twitching and leaping like a puppet.

It was not the crudity of such a dance in such a place that had set everyone off, it was the sight and sound of the blood that creamed and frothed from his throat. The man seemed, as he hopped and stamped about, to be trying to stem the flow by squeezing at his neck with both hands, but the very pressure of the blood as it pumped outwards made such a task impossible.

Time stands still at such moments.

Those who retold the scene afterwards to friends, to psychiatrists, to priests, to the press, all spoke of the noise. To some it was a rattling gargle, to others a bubbling croak: the old man in the tweed jacket and his young companion agreed that they could never hear again the sound of a cappuccino machine without being forced to think of that awful death wheeze.

All remembered the staggering quantity of the blood, the force of it pushing through the man's fingers. All remembered the chorus of bass voices upraised in panic as helping hands braved the red shower and leapt forward to ease the jerking figure to the floor. All recalled how nothing could staunch the ferocious jetting of the fountain that gushed from the mans neck and quenched the words Tm Going to Live For Ever' on his T-shirt with a dark stain. All remarked on how long it seemed to take him to die.

But only one of them remembered seeing an enormously fat man with a small head and lank hair leave the room, letting a knife leap from his hand like a live fish as he went.

Only one man saw that, and he kept it to himself. He grabbed his companions hand and led him from the room.

'Come, Adrian. I think we should be otherwhere.'





One

I

Adrian checked the orchid at his buttonhole, inspected the spats at his feet, gave the lavender gloves a twitch, smoothed down his waistcoat, tucked the ebony Malacca-cane under his arm, swallowed twice and pushed wide the changing-room door.

'Ah, my dears,' he cried. 'Congratulations! Congratulations to you all! A triumph, an absolute triumph!'

'Well, what the fuck's he wearing now?' they snorted from the steamy end of the room.

'You're an arse and an idiot, Healey.'

Burkiss threw a flannel onto the shiny top hat. Adrian reached up and took it between forefinger and thumb.

'If there is the slightest possibility, Burkiss, that this flannel has absorbed any of the juices that leak from within you, that it has mopped up a single droplet of your revolting pubescent greases, that it has tickled and frotted even one of the hideously mired corners of your disgusting body then I shall have a spasm. I'm sorry but I shall.'

In spite of himself, Cartwright smiled. He moved further along the bench and turned his back, but he smiled.

'Now, girls,' continued Healey, 'you're very high-spirited and that's as it should be but I won't have you getting out of hand. I just looked in to applaud a simply marvellous show and to tell you that you are certainly the loveliest chorus in town and that I intend to stand you all dinner at the Embassy one by one over the course of what I know will be a long and successful run.'

'I mean, what kind of coat is that?'

'It is called an astrakhan and I am sure you agree that it is absolutely the ratherest thing. You will observe it fits my sumptuous frame as snugly as if it were made for me . . . just as you do, you delicious Hopkinson.'

'Oh shut up.'

'Your whole body goes quite pink when you are flattered, like a small pig, it is utterly, utterly fetching.'

Adrian saw Cartwright turn away and face his locker, a locker to which Adrian had the key. The boy seemed now to be concentrating on pulling on his socks. Adrian took half a second to take a mental snapshot of the scrummy toes and heavenly ankle being sheathed by those lucky, lucky socks, a snapshot he could develop and pore over later with all the others that he had pasted into the private album of his memory.

Cartwright wondered why Healey sometimes stared at him like that. He could sense it when he did, even when he couldn't see, he could feel those cool eyes surveying him with pity and contempt for a younger boy who didn't have so sharp a tongue, so acid a wit as almighty Healey. But there were others dumber than he was, why should Healey single him out for special treatment?

Setting a spatted foot on the bench that ran down the middle of the changing-room with elegant disdain, Adrian began to flip through a pile of Y-fronts and rugger shorts with his cane.

'I was particularly taken,' he said, 'with that number in the first act when you and the girls from Marlborough stood in a line and jumped up at that funny leather ball. It was too utterly utter for words. Lord how I laughed when you let the Marlborough chorus run off with it . . . dear me, this belongs to someone who doesn't appear to know how to wipe his bottom. Is there a name-tape? Madison, you really should pay more attention to your personal hygiene, you know. Two sheets of lavatory paper is all it takes. One to wipe and one to polish. Oh, how you skipped after that Marlborough pack, you blissful creatures! But they wouldn't give you the ball, would they? They kept banging it on the ground and kicking it over your lovely goalpost.'

'It was the referee,' said Gooderson. 'He had it in for us.'

'Well whatever, Gooderson darling, the fact is that after this wonderful matinee performance there is no doubt that you are all going to become simply the toast of the town. Certain unscrupulous men may call upon you here in your dressing-room. They will lavish you with flowers, with compliments, with phials of Hungary water and methuselahs of the costliest champagne. You must be wary of such men, my hearts, they are not to be trusted.'

'What, what will they do to us?'

'They will take the tender flower of your innocence, Jarvis, and they will bruise it.'

'Will it hurt?'

'Not if it is prepared beforehand. If you come to my study this evening I will ready you for the process with a soothing unguent of my own invention. Wear something green, you should always wear green, Jarvis.'

'Ooh, can I come top?' said Rundell, who was by way of being the Tart of the House.

'And me!' squeaked Harman.

'All are welcome.'

The voice of Robert Bennett-Jones bellowed from the showers. 'Just shut up and get bloody dressed.'

'You're invited too, R.B.-J., didn't I make that clear?'

Bennett-Jones, hairy and squat, came out of the shower and stumped up to Adrian.

Cartwright dropped his rugger shirt into the laundry bin and left the changing-room, trailing his duffle-bag along the ground. As the doors flapped behind him he heard Bennett-Jones's harsh baritone.

'You are disgusting, Healey, you know that?'

He should stay to hear Healey's magnificent put-down, but what was the point? They said that when Healey arrived he had got the highest ever marks in a scholarship entrance. Once, in his first term, Cartwright had been bold enough to ask him why he was so clever, what exercises he did to keep his brain fit. Healey had laughed.

'It's memory, Cartwright, old dear. Memory, the mother of the Muses ... at least that's what thingummy said.'

'Who?'

'You know, what's his name, Greek poet chap. Wrote the Theogony . . . what was he called? Begins with an "H"'

'Homer?'

'No, dear. Not Homer, the other one. No, it's gone. Anyway. Memory, that's the key.'

Cartwright went into the House library and took down the first volume of the Chamber's Encyclopaedia. He had still only got as far as Bismarck.

In the changing-room, Bennett Jones snarled into Adrian's face.

'Just plain fucking disgusting.'

The others, some of whom had been peacocking about the room, stroking their towels round their napes like boas, staggered to guilty halts.

'You're a fucking queer and you're turning the whole House into fucking queers.'

'Queer am I?' said Adrian. 'They called Oscar Wilde a queer, they called Michelangelo a queer, they called Tchaikovsky a - '

'And they were queers,' said Sargent, another prefect.

'Well, yes, there is that,' conceded Adrian, 'my argument rather falls down there I grant you, but what I say is this, my door is always open to you, R.B.-J., and to you as well, Sargent, naturally, and if either of you has any problems in coming to terms with your sexuality you mustn't hesitate to visit me and talk about it.'

'Oh for God's sake '

'We can thrash it out together. Personally I think it's your habit of dressing up in shorts and prancing about on a field and this bizarre obsession with putting your arms round the other members of the scrum and forcing your head between the bottoms of the back row that is at the root of this insane fixation. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.'

'Let's fucking throw him out,' said Sargent, advancing.

'Now I warn you,' said Adrian, 'if either of you touches me . . .'

'Yes?' sneered Bennett-Jones. 'What'll you do?'

'I shall sustain a massive erection, that's what, and I shan't be answerable for the consequences. Some kind of ejaculation is almost bound to ensue and if either of you were to become pregnant I should never forgive myself.'

This was just enough to bring the others down onto his side and have the prefects laughed into retreat.

'Well, my lovelies, I shall have to leave you now. I am promised to the Princes Despina this evening. A little baccarat after supper is my guess. She means to win back the Kurzenauer Emeralds. Jarvis, you have a stiffy, this is most unpleasant, someone throw some cold water over him. Goonight, Lou. Goonight, May. Goonight. Ta ta. Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good night.'

English boarding schools have much to recommend them. If boys are going to be adolescent, and science has failed to come up with a way of stopping them, then much better to herd them together and let them get on with it in private. Six hundred suits of skin oozing with pustules, six hundred scalps weeping oil, twelve hundred armpits shooting out hair, twelve hundred inner thighs exploding with fungus and six hundred minds filling themselves with suicidal drivel: the world is best protected from this.

For the good of society, therefore, Adrian Healey, like many Healeys before him, had been sent to a prep school at the age of seven, had proceeded to his public school at twelve and now, fifteen years old, he stood trembling with pubertal confusion on the brink of life. There was little to admire. The ravages of puberty had attacked his mind more than his skin, which was some kind of a blessing. From time to time a large, yellow-crowned spot would pop from his forehead, or a blackhead worm its way from the sweaty shelter of the side of his nose, but generally the complexion was good enough not to betray the hormonal crisis and mental havoc that boiled within and the eyes were wide and sensual enough for him to be thought attractive. Too smart at exam passing to be kept out of the Sixth Form, too disrespectful and dishonourable to be a prefect, he had read and absorbed more than he could understand, so he lived by pastiche and pretence.

His constipation, furred tongue and foul-smelling feet were no more than conventional school attributes, passed down from generation to generation, like slang and sadism. Adrian might have been unorthodox, but he was not so blind to the proper decencies as to cultivate smooth-flowing bowels or healthy feet. His good nature prevented him from discovering the pleasures of bullying and his cowardice allowed him to ignore it in others.

The great advantage of English public school life lies of course in the quality of tutelage it provides. Adrian had received a decent and broad English education in the area of his loins. Not all the credit for this could go to his schoolmasters, although a few of them had not been afraid to give practical guidance and instruction of a kind which would gladden the heart of those who believe that the modern teacher is slipshod in his approach to the Whole Boy. Mostly he had been given space to make his own way and learn his own lessons of the flesh. He had quickly happened upon the truth which many lonely contemporaries would never discover, the truth that everybody, simply everybody, was panting for it and could, with patience, be shown that they were panting for it. So Adrian grabbed what was to hand and had the time of his life genitally - focusing exclusively on his own gender of course, for this was 1973 and girls had not yet been invented.

His love life, however, was less happy. Earlier that afternoon he had worshipped at his altar in a private welter of misery that his public swagger never hinted at.

It had been upstairs, in the Long Dorm. The room was empty, the floorboards squeaking more faintly than usual beneath his tread. Cartwright's cubicle had its curtain drawn. The distant moan of whistles and cheers on the Upper Games Field and the nearer bang of a downstairs door slamming shut had unsettled him. They were over-familiar, with a bogus, echoing quality, a staginess that put him on his guard. The whole school knew he was here. They knew he liked to creep about the House alone. They were watching, he was convinced of it. The background shouts of rugger and hockey weren't real, they were part of a taped soundtrack played to deceive him. He was walking into a trap. It had always been a trap. No one had ever believed in him. They signed him off games and let him think that he had the House to himself. But they knew, they had always known. Tom, Bullock, Hey don-Bay ley, even Cart-wright. Especially Cartwright. They watched and they waited. They all knew and they all bided their time until the moment they had chosen for his exposure and disgrace.

Let them watch, let them know. Here was Cartwright's bed and under the pillow, here, yes, here the pyjamas. Soft brushed cotton, like Cartwright's soft brushed hair and a smell, a smell that was Cartwright to the last molecule. There was even a single gold hair shining on the collar, and there, just down there, a new aroma, an aroma, an essence that rippled outwards from the centre of the whole Cartwrightness of Cartwright.

For Adrian other people did not exist except as extras, as bit-players in the film of his life. No one but he had noted the splendour and agony of existence, no one else was truly or fully alive. He alone gasped at dew trapped in cobwebs, at spring buds squeaking into life. Afternoon light bouncing like a yo-yo in a stream of spittle dropping from a cow's lips, the slum-wallpaper peel of bark on birches, the mash of wet leaves pulped into pavements, they grew and burst only in him. Only he knew what it was to love.

Haaaaaaah ... if they really were watching then now was the time to pull back the curtain and jeer, now was the time to howl contempt.

But nothing. No yells, no sneers, no sound at all to burst the swollen calm of the afternoon.

Adrian trembled as he stood and did himself up. It was an illusion. Of course it was an illusion. No one watched, no one judged, no one pointed or whispered. Who were they, after all? Low-browed, scarlet-naped rugger-buggers with no more grace and vision than a jockstrap.

Sighing, he had moved to his own cubicle and laid out the astrakhan coat and top hat.

If you can't join them, he thought, beat them.

He had fallen in love with Hugo Alexander Timothy Cartwright the moment he laid eyes on him, when, as one of a string of five new arrivals, the boy had trickled into evening hall the first night of Adrian's second year.

Hey don-Bay ley nudged him.

'What do you reckon, Healey? Lush, or what?'

For once Adrian had remained silent. Something was terribly wrong.

It had taken him two painful terms to identify the symptoms. He looked them up in all the major textbooks. There was no doubt about it. All the authorities concurred: Shakespeare, Tennyson, Ovid, Keats, Georgette Heyer, Milton, they were of one opinion. It was love. The Big One.

Cartwright of the sapphire eyes and golden hair, Cartwright of the Limbs and Lips: he was Petrarch's Laura, Milton's Lycidas, Catullus's Lesbia, Tennyson's Hallam, Shakespeare's fair boy and dark lady, the moon's Endymion. Cartwright was Garbo's salary, the National Gallery, he was cellophane: he was the tender trap, the blank unholy surprise of it all and the bright golden haze on the meadow: he was honey-honey, sugar-sugar, chirpy chirpy cheep-cheep and his baby-love: the voice of the turtle could be heard in the land, there were angels dining at the Ritz and a nightingale sang in Berkeley Square.

Adrian had managed to coax Cartwright into an amusing half-hour in the House lavs two terms previously, but he had never doubted he could get the trousers down: that wasn't it. He wanted something more from him than the few spasms of pleasure that the limited activities of rubbing and licking and heaving and pushing could offer.

He wasn't sure what the thing was that he yearned for, but one thing he did know. It was less acceptable to love, to ache for eternal companionship, than it was to bounce and slurp and gasp behind the fives courts. Love was Adrian's guilty secret, sex his public pride.

He closed the changing-room door and fanned himself with the lavender gloves. It had been a close thing. Too close. The greater the lengths he went to to be liked, the more enemies he gathered on the way. If he fell, Bennett-Jones and others would be there to kick him.. One thing was for certain, the Queer Pose was running dry and a new one was going to have to be dreamt up or there would be Trouble.

A gang of fags was mobbing about by the noticeboards. They fell silent as he approached. He patted one of them on the head.

'Pretty children,' he sighed, digging into his waistcoat pocket and pulling out a handful of change. 'Tonight you shall eat.'

Scattering the coins at their feet, he moved on.

Mad, he said to himself as he approached his study door. I think I must be mad.

Tom was there, in a yoga position, biting his toe-nails and listening to Aqualung. Adrian sank into a chair and removed his hat.

'Tom,' he said, 'you are looking at a crushed violet, a spent egg, a squeezed tube.'

'I'm looking at a git,' said Tom. 'What's with the coat?'

'You're right,' said Adrian, 'I am stupid today. And every day. Stupid, stupid, stupid. Horrid, horrid, horrid. Morbid, morbid, morbid. Torrid, torpid, turbid. Everying in my life ends in id. Get it?'

'Get what?'

'Id. It's Freud. You know.'

'Oh. Right. Yeah. Id.'

'Idealistic idiot, idiosyncratic idler. Everything begins in id as well.'

'Everything begins with "I", you mean. Which is ego,' said Tom, placing an ankle behind his ear, 'not id.'

'Well of course it's very easy to be clever. If you could just help me out of this coat, I'm beginning to sweat.'

'Sorry,' said Tom. 'I'm stuck.'

'Are you serious?'

'No.'

Adrian fought his way out of his costume and into his uniform while Tom reverted to a half-lotus and recounted his day.

'Went into town and bought a couple of LPs this afternoon.'

'Don't tell me,' said Adrian, 'let me guess . . . Parsifal and Lark Ascending}'

'Atom Heart Mother and Salty Dog.'

'Close.'

Tom lit a cigarette.

'You know what pisses me off about this place?'

'The cuisine? The distressingly plain uniforms?'

'I bumped into Rosengard in the High Street and he asked me why I wasn't watching the match. I mean what?'

'You should've asked him why he wasn't.'

'I said I was just on my way.'

'Rebel.'

'I like to keep my nose clean.'

'Well, " I'm just on my way" isn't a very stylish handkerchief, is it? You could have said that the match was too exciting and that your nervous system simply couldn't bear any more suspense.'

'Well I didn't. I came back here, had a wank and finished that book.'

'The Naked Lunch?'

'Yeah.'

'What did you reckon?'

'Crap.'

'You're just saying that because you didn't understand it,' said Adrian.

'I'm just saying that because I did understand it,' said Tom. 'Any road up, we'd better start making some toast. I invited Bullock and Sampson over.'

'Oh, what?'

'We owe them a study tea.'

'You know I hate intellectuals.'

'You mean you hate people who are cleverer than you are.'

'Yes. I suppose that's why I like you so much, Tom.'

Tom gave him a pained, constipated stare.

'I'll boil the kettle,' he said.

Cartwright looked up from the Chamber's Encyclopaedia and mouthed, 'Otto Von Bismarck born in . . . in 1815, the year of Waterloo and the Congress of Vienna. Founder of modern Germany . . .'

In his line of sight were hundreds of books, the only one of which he could remember reading was To Kill a Mockingbird in the company of the rest of his fifth form at prep school. Such a great many books and yet this was still only the House library. The School library had thousands and thousands more and university libraries . . . Time was so short and his memory so feeble. What was it Healey had said? Memory is the mother of the Muses.

Cartwright levered Malthus to Nantucket from off the shelf and looked up Muses. There were nine of them and they were the daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne. If Healey was right then Mnemosyne must mean memory.

Of course! The English word 'mnemonic', something that reminds you of something. Mnemonic must be derived from Mnemosyne. Or the other way around. Cartwright made a note in his rough-book.

According to the encyclopaedia, most of what was known of the Muses came down from the writings of Hesiod, particularly this Theogony. That must have been the poet Healey was referring to, Hesiod. But how did Healey know all that? He never seemed to be reading, at least no more than anyone else. Cartwright would never catch up with him. It just wasn't bloody fair.

He wrote down the names of the Muses and returned with a sigh to Bismarck. One day he would get right to the end, to zythum. Not that he needed to. He had peeped ahead and seen that it was a kind of ancient Egyptian beer, much recommended by Diodorus Siculus - whoever he was.

Everyone had been rather surprised the day Adrian announced that he was going to share a study with Tom.

'Thompson?' Heydon-Bayley had shrieked. 'But he's a complete dildo, surely?'

'I like him,' said Adrian, 'he's unusual.'

'Graceless, you mean. Wooden.'

Certainly there was nothing obviously appetising about Tom's appearance or manner, and he remained one of the few boys of his year with whom Adrian had never made the beast with two backs, or rather with whom he had never made the beast with one back and an interestingly shaped middle, but over the last year, more people had come to see that there was something arresting about Tom. He wasn't clever, but he worked hard and had set himself to read a great deal, in order, Adrian assumed, to acquire some of Adrian's dash and sparkle. Tom always went his own way with his own ideas. He managed to get away with the longest hair in the House and the most public nicotine habit in the school, somehow without ever drawing attention to himself. It was as if he grew his hair long and smoked cigarettes because he liked to, not because he liked being seen to. This was dangerously subversive.

Freda, the German undermatron, once discovered him sunbathing nude in the spinney.

'Thompson,' she had cried in outrage, 'you cannot be lying about naked!'

'Sorry, Matron, you're right,' Tom murmured, and he had reached out a hand arid put on a pair of mirrored sunglasses. 'Don't know what I was thinking of.'

Adrian felt that it was he who had brought Tom into notice and popularity, that Tom was his own special creation. The silent spotty gink of the first year had been transformed into someone admired and imitated and Adrian wasn't sure how much he liked it.

He liked Tom all right. He was the only person he had ever spoken to about his love for Cartwright and Tom had the decency not to be interested or sympathetic enough to quench the pure holy flame of Adrian's passion with sympathy or advice. Sampson and Bullock he could do without, however. Especially Sampson, who was too much of a grammar-school-type swot ever to be quite the thing. Not an ideal tea-companion at all.

Tea was a very special institution, revolving as it did around the ceremony and worship of Toast. In a place where alcohol, tobacco and drugs were forbidden, it was essential that something should take their place as a powerful and public totem of virility and cool. Toast, for reasons lost in time, was the substance chosen. Its name was dropped on every possible occasion, usually pronounced, in awful public school accents, 'taste'.

'I was just having some toast, when Burton and Hopwood came round . . .'

'Harman's not a bad fag actually. He makes really majorly good toast . . .'

'Yeah, you should come round to my study, maybe, we'll get some toast going . . .'

'God, I can hardly move. I've just completely overdone it on the toast . . .'

Adrian had been looking forward to toasting up with Tom in private and talking about Cartwright.

'Oh, Christ,' he said, clearing a space on his desk for the teapot. 'Oh, Christly Christ.'

'Problem?'

'I shall know no peace other than being kissed by him,' moaned Adrian.

'That a fact?'

'It is a fact, and I'll tell you what else is a fact. It's a fact that he is wearing his blue Shetland turtle-neck today. Even as we speak his body is moving inside it. Warm and quick. It's more than flesh and blood can stand.'

'Have a cold shower, then,' said Tom.

Adrian banged down the teapot and grabbed Tom by the shoulder.

'Cold shower?' he shouted. 'Jessica Christ, man, I'm talking about love! You know what it does to me? It shrinks my stomach, doesn't it, Tom? It pickles my guts, yeah. But what does it do to my mind? It tosses the sandbags overboard so the balloon can soar. Suddenly I'm above the ordinary. I'm competent, supremely competent. I'm walking a tightrope over Niagara Falls. I'm one of the great ones. I'm Michelangelo, moulding the beard of Moses. I'm Van Gogh, painting pure sunlight. I'm Horowitz, playing the Emperor Concerto. I'm John Barrymore before the movies got him by the throat. I'm Jesse James and his two brothers - all three of them. I'm W. Shakespeare. And out there it's not the school any longer - it's the Nile, Tom, the Nile - and down it floats the barge of Cleopatra.'

'Not bad,' said Tom, 'not bad at all. Your own?'

'Ray Milland in The Lost Weekend. But he could have been talking about Cartwright.'

'But he was talking about alcohol,' said Tom, 'which should tell you a lot.'

'Meaning?'

'Meaning shut up and get buttering.'

'I shall put the Liebestod on the stereo, that's what I shall do, you horrid beastly man,' said Adrian, 'and still my beating heart with concord of sweet sounds. But quick, man! - I hear a hansom drawing up outside! And here, Watson, unless I am very much mistaken, is our client now upon the stair. Come in!'

Sampson appeared at the doorway, blinking through his spectacles, followed by Bullock who tossed a jar at Tom.

'Hi. I brought some lemon curd.'

'Lemon curd!' said Adrian. 'And what was I saying only this minute, Tom?' "If only we had some lemon curd for our guests." You're a mind-reader, Bollocks.'

'Some toast over there,' said Tom.

'Thanks, Thompson,' said Sampson, helping himself. 'Good-erson tells me you were not unadjacent to mobbing up R.B.-J. and Sargent in the changing-rooms, Healey.'

'Dame Rumour outstrides me yet again.'

Not unadjacent? Jesus...

Bullock slapped Tom on the back.

'Hey, Tommo!' he said. 'I see you've got Atom Heart Mother at last. What do you reckon? Far outsville or far insville?'

While Tom and Bullock talked about Pink Floyd, Sampson told Adrian why he thought Mahler was in actual fact wilder, in the sense of more controlled, than any rock group.

'That's an interesting point,' said Adrian, 'in the sense of not being interesting at all.'

When the tea and toast were finished, Bullock stood up and cleared his throat.

'I think I should announce my plan now, Sam.'

'Definitely,' said Sampson.

'What ho!' said Adrian, getting up to shut the door. 'Treasons, stratagems and spoils.'

'It's like this,' said Bullock. 'My brother, I don't know if you know, is at Radley, on account of my parents thinking it a bad idea to have us both at the same school.'

'On account of your being twins?' said Adrian.

'Right, on account of my mother OD-ing on fertility drugs. Any old way, he wrote to me last week telling me about an incredible bitch of a row blazing there on account of someone having been and gone and produced an unofficial magazine called Raddled, full of obscene libellous Oz-like filth. And what I thought, what Sammy and I thought, was - why not?'

'Why not what?' said Tom.

'Why not do the same thing here?'

'You mean an underground magazine?'

'Yup.'

Tom opened and shut his mouth. Sampson smirked.

'Jesus suffering fuck,' said Adrian. 'It's not half a thought.'

'Face it, it's a wow.'

'These guys,' said Tom, 'the ones who put out this magazine at Radley. What happened to them?'

Sampson polished his spectacles with the end of his tie.

'Ah, now this is why we must proceed with great circumspection. They were both, hum, "put out" themselves. "Booted out" I believe is the technical phrase.'

'That means it's got to be a secret,' said Bullock. 'We write it in the holidays. You send me the material, typed onto stencils. I get it duplicated on my dad's office Gestetner, bring it back at the beginning of next term, we find a way of distributing it secretly round all the Houses.'

'All a bit Colditz, isn't it?' said Tom.

'No, no!' said Adrian. 'Don't you listen to Thompson, he's an old cynicky-boots. I'm in, Bollocks. I'm in for definite. What sort of material do you want?'

'Oh you know,' said Bullock, 'seditious, anti-public school. That kind of thing. Something to shake them up a bit.'

'I'm planning a sort of fabliau comparing this place with a fascist state,' said Sampson, 'sort of Animal Farm meets Arturo Ui. . .'

'Stop it, Sammy, I'm wet at the very thought,' said Adrian. He looked across at Tom.

'What do you reckon?'

'Yeah, why not? Sounds a laugh.'

'And remember,' said Bullock, 'not a word to anyone.'

'Our lips are sealed,' said Adrian. Lips. Sealed. Dangerous Words. Not five minutes could pass without him thinking of Cartwright.

Bullock took a tobacco tin out of his pocket and looked around the room.

'Now,' he said, 'if someone would close the curtains and light a joss-stick, I have here for your delight some twenty-four-carat black Nepalese cannabis resin which should be smoked immediately on account of it being seriously good shit.'

II

Adrian threw himself along the corridor towards Biffen's form-room. Dr Meddlar, one of the school chaplains, stopped him.

'Late, Healey.'

'Really, sir? So am I.'

Meddlar took him by the shoulders. 'You're riding for a fall, Healey, you know that? There are hedges and ditches ahead and you are on course for an almighty cropper.'

'Sir.'

'And I shall be cheering and laughing as you tumble,' said Meddlar, his spectacles flashing.

'That's just the warm-hearted Christian in you, sir.'

'Listen to me!' spat Meddlar. 'You think you're very clever, don't you? Well let me tell you that this school has no room for creatures like you.'

'Why are you saying this to me, sir?'

'Because if you don't learn to live with others, if you don't conform, your life is going to be one long miserable hell.'

'Will that give you satisfaction, sir? Will that please you?'

Meddlar stared at him and gave a hollow little laugh. 'What , gives you the right to talk to me like that, boy? What on earth do you think gives you the right?'

Adrian was furious to find that there were tears springing to his eyes. 'God gives me the right, sir, because God loves me. And God won't let me be judged by a f-f-fascist - hypocrite -bastard like you!' He squirmed away from Meddlar's grasp and ran on down the corridor. 'Bastard,' he tried to shout, but the words choked in his throat. 'Fucking bloody bastard.'

Meddlar laughed after him. 'You're evil, Healey, quite evil.'

Adrian ran on and out into the quad. Everyone was in morning school. The colonnade was empty, the Old School Room, the library, the headmaster's house, the Founder's lawn, all deserted. This again was Adrian's home, an empty world. He imagined the whole school with noses pressed up against their form-room windows staring out at him as he ran through the West Quad. Prefects with walkie-talkies striding down the corridor, 'This is Blue Seven. Subject proceeding along past the Cavendish library towards the Music School. Over.'

'Blue Seven this is Meddlar. Interview went according to plan, subject now unstable and in tears. Red Three will continue surveillance in the Music School. Over and out.'

Either they've got a life and I'm imaginary, thought Adrian, or I've got a life and they're imaginary.

He'd read all the books, he knew he was really the same as anyone else. But who else had snakes wrestling in their stomachs like this? Who was running beside him with the same desperation? Who else would remember this moment and every moment like it to the last day of their lives? No one. They were all at their desks thinking of rugger and lunch. He was different and alone.

The ground floor of the Music School was filled with little practice-rooms. As Adrian stumbled along the passageway he could hear lessons in progress. A cello pushed a protesting Saint-Saens swan along the water. A trumpet further along farted out 'Thine be the glory'. And there, third from the end, Adrian saw through the glass panel, was Cartwright, making quite a decent fist of a Beethoven minuet.

Fate was always doing this. There were six hundred boys in the school and although Adrian went out of his way to intercept Cartwright and to engineer apparently accidental meetings - he had learnt his time table off by heart - he was sure that he bumped into him by genuine chance more often than was natural.

Cartwright appeared to be alone in the practice-room. Adrian pushed open the door and went in.

'Hi,' he said, 'don't stop, it's good.'

'Oh, it's terrible really,' said Cartwright, 'I can't get the left hand working smoothly.'

'That's not what I've heard,' said Adrian and immediately wanted to bite off his tongue.

Here he was, alone in a room with Cartwright, whose hair was even now leaping with light from the sunshine that poured in through the window, Cartwright whom he loved with his whole life and being and all he could find to say was 'That's not what I've heard.' Jesus, what was the matter with him? He might just as well have put on an Eric Morecambe voice, shouted 'There's no answer to that' and slapped Cartwright's cheeks.

'Um, official lesson?' he said.

'Well, I've got my Grade Three exam in half an hour, so this is a practice. It lets me off double maths at least.'

'Lucky you.'

Lucky you? Oh, pure Oscar Wilde.

'Well, I'd better let you get on with it then, hadn't I?'

Great, Adrian, brilliant. Magisterial. 'I'd better let you get on with it then, hadn't I?' Change one syllable and the whole delicate epigram collapses.

'Right,' said Cartwright and turned back to his music.

'Cheerio, then. G'luck!'

'Bye.'

Adrian closed the door.

Oh God, Oh Godly God.

He wound a fraught trail back to the form-rooms. Thank God it was only Biffen.

'You're extraordinarily late, Healey.'

'Well, sir,' said Adrian, sitting at his desk, 'the way I look at it, better extraordinarily late than extraordinarily never.'

'Perhaps you'd like to tell me what kept you?'

'Not really, sir.'

Something of a gasp ran round the form-room. This was going it a big strong, even for Healey.

'I beg your pardon?'

'Well, not in front of the whole form, sir. It's rather personal.'

'Oh I see. I see,' said Biffen. 'Well, in that case, you had better tell me afterwards.'

'Sir.'

Nothing like getting a schoolmaster's curiosity glands juicing.

Adrian looked out of the window.

'Oh to be in Cartwright, now that March is here.'

Any minute now, some lucky examiner was going to be watching a lovely little frown furrow Cartwright's brow as he skipped through his minuet. Watching the woollen sleeve of his winter jacket ride up his arms.

'Whenas in wool my Cartwright goes, Then, then methinks how sweetly flows, That liquefaction of his clothes.'

He became aware of Biffen's voice knocking at the door of his dreams.

'Can you give us an example, Healey?'

'Er, example, sir?'

'Yes, of a subjunctive following a superlative.'

'A superlative, you say, sir?'

'Yes.'

'A subjunctive following a superlative?'

'Yes, yes.'

'Um . . . how about "legargon leplus beau queje connaisse"}''

'Er . . . the finest boy that I know? Yes that meets the case.'

'Finest, sir? I meant the most beautiful.'

Damn, he was supposed to be phasing out the queer pose. Well, at least it got a laugh.

'Thank you, Healey, that will do. Be quiet, the rest of you, he really doesn't need any encouragement.'

Oh but I do, thought Adrian, I need all the encouragement going.

The lesson moved on, Biffen leaving him alone to daydream.

At the end of the forty minutes he reacted to the bell as fast as he could, streaking to the doorway from the back of the form- room and trying to lose himself in the crowd, but Biffen called him back.

'Aren't you forgetting something, Healey?'

'Sir?'

'You owe me an explanation for your unpunctuality, I think.'

Adrian approached the dais.

'Oh yes, sir. The thing is, sir, I was going to be late anyway - only a bit, but I bumped into Dr Meddlar.'

'He kept you for twenty minutes?'

'Yes, sir - or rather no, sir. He was very rude to me. He upset me, sir.'

'Rude to you? The Chaplain was rude to you?'

'I'm sure that's not how he would put it, sir.' Adrian had a shot at his pure but troubled expression. It was particularly effective when looking up at someone, as he was now. It was loosely based on Dominic Guard's Leo in the film of The Go-Between. A sort of baffled honesty.

'He ... he made me cry, sir, and I was too embarrassed to come in blubbing, so I went and hid in the music-room until I felt better.'

This was all terribly unfair on poor old Biffen, whom Adrian rather adored for his snowy hair and perpetual air of benign astonishment. And 'blubbing' . . . Blubbing went out with 'decent' and 'ripping'. Mind you, not a bad new language to start up. 1920s schoolboy slang could be due for a revival.

'Oh dear. But I'm sure the Chaplain must have had good reason to be . . . that is, Dr Meddlar wouldn't speak sharply to you without cause.'

'Well I admit I was cheeky to him, sir. But you know what he's like.'

'He is, I am sure, a scrupulously fair man.'

'Yes, sir. I - I wouldn't want you to think that I've been lying to you, sir. I'm sure Dr Meddlar will tell you his side of the story if you ask him.'

'I won't do that. I know whether a boy is telling me the truth or not.'

'Thank you, sir.'

Did he hell. They never bloody did.

'I don't want to lecture you, Healey, and I don't want to keep you from your morning break, but you must face the fact that many members of staff are beginning to lose their patience. Perhaps you feel they don't understand you?'

'I think the problem is that they do understand me, sir.'

'Yes. You see that is exactly the kind of remark that is guaranteed to put certain masters' backs up, isn't it? Sophistication is not an admired quality. Not only at school. Nobody likes it anywhere. In England at any rate.'

'Sir.'

'You're the cleverest boy in my French set. You know that perfectly well. But you've never worked. That makes you the stupidest boy in the school.'

Parable of the talents next, what was the betting?

'What are your university thoughts?'

'Oh, well sir . . . you know. After "A" levels I think I'll've had it with education, really. And it will probably have had it with me.'

'I see. Tell me, what do you do on Friday afternoons, Healey? I take it you're not in the Cadet Force.'

'Threw me out, sir. It was an outrage.'

'Yes, I'm sure it was. So it's Pioneering, is it?'

'Yes, sir. There's a little old lady I visit.'

'Well,' said Biffen filling his briefcase with exercise books, 'there's a little old lady and a little old man in the Morley Road you might also find time to visit one day. My wife and I always give tea on Fridays, you'd be most welcome.'

'Thank you, sir.'

'You don't have to let us know in advance. We shall expect you when we see you. Off you go then.'

'Thank you, Mr Biffen, thank you very much.'

Adrian instinctively offered his hand which Biffen took with tremendous firmness, looking him straight in the eye.

'I'm not Mr Chips, you know. I'm perfectly well aware that you feel sorry for me. It's bad enough from the staff, but I won't take pity from you. I won't.'

'No sir,' said Adrian, 'I wasn't . . .'

'Good.'

III

Tom and Adrian and Pigs Trotter, an occasional hanger-on, were walking into town. From time to time tracksuited boys ran past them, with all the deadly, purpose and humourless concentration of those who enjoyed Games. Juniors twittered along, running sticks against palings and whispering. Adrian thought it worth while trying out his new slang.

'I say, you fellows, here's a rum go! Old Biffo was jolly odd this morning. He gave me a lot of pi-jaw about slacking and then invited me to tea. No rotting! He did really.'

'I expect he fancies you,' said Tom.

'That's beastly talk, Thompson. Jolly well take it back or expect a good scragging.'

They walked on for a bit, Adrian practising new phrases and Pigs Trotter lumbering behind laughing so indiscriminately that Adrian soon tired of the game.

'Anyway,' he said. 'Tell me about your parents, Tom.'

'What do you want to know?'

'Well, you never talk about them.'

'Nothing to say about my folks,' Thompson said. 'Dad works for British Steel, Mum is next in line for Mayor. Two sisters, both mad, and a brother who's coming here next term.'

'What about you, Healey?' said Pigs Trotter. 'What do your parents do?'

'Parent,' said Adrian. 'The mother is no more.'

Trotter was upset.

'Oh God,' he said, 'I'm sorry. I didn't realise . . .'

'No, that's fine. Car crash. When I was twelve.'

'That's . . . that's awful.'

'If we go to Gladys Winkworth, I'll tell you the whole story.'

The church in the town was perched on a hill and in the cemetery - which people of shattering wit like Sampson never tired of calling 'the dead centre of town' - there was an old wooden bench on which was a plaque which said 'Gladys Winkworth'. Nothing else. The assumption was that it had been erected by a doting widower as a lasting memorial to his dead wife. Tom thought she was actually buried under it. Adrian believed it was simply the bench's proper name and he stuck to that belief.

From Gladys, the Upper, Middle and Lower Games Fields, the science block, the sports hall, the theatre, the Old School Room, libraries, chapel, Hall and Art School were all visible. You felt like a general observing a battle.

The day was cold and the breath steamed from their mouths and nostrils as they climbed through the graveyard.

'Alas, regardless of their fate the little victims play,' said Adrian. 'The quick and the young play peep-bo behind the marking stones of the cold and the dead.'

Tom and Adrian sat down and waited for Pigs Trotter to catch up.

'It's not a nice story, the story of my mother,' said Adrian as Trotter finally crashed down beside them, 'but I'll tell it if you promise to keep it to yourselves. Only Pa Tickford knows. My father told him when I arrived here.'

Trotter nodded breathlessly. 'I won't tell a soul, Healey. Honest.'

Adrian looked at Tom who nodded gravely.

'Very well then,' said Adrian. 'One evening about three years ago . . . almost exactly three years ago in fact, I was sitting at home watching television. It was A Man Called Ironside, I remember. My father is a Professor of Biochemistry at Bristol University and he often works late. My mother had been in the kitchen since three in the afternoon drinking vodka from a teacup. At ten o'clock she smashed the cup onto the floor and cried out so I could hear her in the sitting room.'

Trotter shifted uncomfortably.

'Look,' he said. 'You don't have to tell us this, you know.'

'No, no, I want to. She had been, as I say, drinking all afternoon and she suddenly howled, "Ten o'clock! It's ten o'fucking clock! Why doesn't he come? Why in God's name doesn't he come?" Something along those lines.

'I went into the kitchen and looked at her face all swollen, her tear-stained and mascara-blotched cheeks and her trembling lip and I remember thinking, "She's like Shelley Winters but without the talent." Don't know why a thought like that should come to me, but it did. I turned back to the telly - couldn't bear to look at her like that - and said, "He's working, Mother. You know he's working."

'"Working?" She shrieked her stinking breath right into my face. "Working! Oh that's very good. Screwing that cunt of a lab assistant is what he's doing. The little bitch. I've seen her . . . with her stupid white coat and her stupid white teeth. Little bitch whore!"

Tom and Trotter both stared at Adrian in disbelief as he screeched out the words, but his eyes were closed and he didn't seem to be aware of them.

'She really could scream, my mother. I thought her voice would fracture with the violence of it, but in fact it was my own which cracked. "You should go to bed, Mother," I said.

'"Bed! He's the one who's in fucking bed," she giggled, and she pulled at the bottle and the last of the vodka just dribbled down her mouth and mixed with the tears that ran down the folds of her fat face. She burped and tried to jam the bottle into the waste-hole of the waste-disposal thing, the thingummy.'

'Garburator,' said Pigs Trotter. 'I think they're called Garburators.'

'Garburator, that's it. She tried to jam the bottle down the Garburator.

'"I'm going to catch them at their little game" she chanted -she put on a kind of sing-song voice whenever she was pissed, it was one of the signs that she was really gone - "That's what I'm going to do. Where are the keys?"

'"Mother, you can't drive!" I said. "Just wait, he'll be back soon. You see."

'"Where are the keys? Where are the fucking car keys?"

'Well, I knew exactly where they were. In the hall, on the table, and I ran for them and stuffed them into my mouth. God knows why. That really got her going.

'"Come here you little bastard, give me those keys!"

'I said, "Mother, you can't drive like this, just leave it, will you?"

'And then . . . then she picked up a vase from off the table and flung it at me. Broke on the side of my head and sent me flying against the foot of the stairs where I tripped and fell. See that scar, just there?'

Adrian parted his hair and showed Trotter and Tom a small white scar.

'Five stitches. Anyway, there was blood all running down my face and she was shaking me and slapping my face, left and right, left and right.

'"Will you give me those fucking keys?" she kept screaming, shaking me on every syllable. I sprawled there, I was crying I don't mind telling you, really wailing. "Please, Mother, you can't go out, you can't. Please!"'

Adrian stopped and looked around.

'Dare we risk a cigarette, do you think?'

Tom lit three at once.

'Go on!' said Pigs Trotter. 'What happened then?'

'Well,' said Adrian inhaling deeply, 'what Mother hadn't seen was that the moment the vase hit me, the car keys had shot out of me like a clay-pigeon from a trap. She thought I still had them in my mouth so she started to try and wrench it open, you know, like a vet trying to give a pill to a dog.

'"So the little bugger's swallowed them has he?" she said.

'I shouted back, "Yes, I've swallowed them! I've swallowed them and you can't get them back! So ... so just forget it." But like a pratt of a heroine in a Hammer horror film I couldn't help looking round for them myself, so of course she followed my eyes, crawled across the hallway and swooped on them. Then she was off. I kept shouting at her to come back. I heard the scrunch on the gravel as she drove away and then - again like some git in a film - I fainted.'

'Christ,' said Pigs Trotter.

'She killed a family of four as well as herself,' said Adrian. 'My father, who had never had an unfaithful thought in his life, has still not really recovered. She was a bitch, my mother. A real bitch.'

'Yes,' said Tom. 'Thing is, Ade, you may have forgotten, but I met your mother last term. Tall woman with a wide smile.'

'Fuck,' said Adrian. 'So you did. Oh well, it was a good try anyway.' He stood and flicked his cigarette behind a gravestone.

Trotter stared at him.

'You mean,' he said. 'You mean that you made that up?'

"Fraid so,' said Adrian.

'All of it?'

'Well my father's a professor, that bit's true.'

'You fucking shitbag,' said Trotter, tears filling his eyes. 'You fucking shitbag!' He stumbled away, choking with tears. Adrian watched him go with surprise.

'What's the matter with Pigs? He must have known it was a lie as soon as I began.'

'Oh nothing,' said Tom, turning his large brown eyes on Adrian. 'His mother and two brothers were killed in a car crash three years ago, that's all.'

'Oh no! No! You're kidding!'

'Yes I am, actually.'

An MCC Tie sat down next to a Powder Blue Safari suit at a window table in the Cafe Bazaar. White Shirts with Black Waistcoats hurried to and fro, the change jingling in their leather pouches.

'Herr Ober,' called the MCC Tie.

'Mein Herr?'

'Zwei Kaffee mit Schlag, bitte. Und Sachertorte. Zweimal.'

The waiter executed a trim Austrian bow and departed.

The Powder Blue Safari Suit mopped his brow.

'No exchange was made,' he said.

Well now,' said the MCC Tie. 'Odysseus will certainly have got hold of the documents and will be preparing to take them out of Salzburg. He must be followed and relieved of them.'

'If the Trojans are prepared to kill Patrochlus in broad daylight . . .'

They won't dare harm Odysseus.'

'He has a companion, you know. A young Englishman.'

The MCC Tie smiled.

'I'm fully aware of it. How shall we style him?''

Telemachus?''

'Quite right. Telemachus. Remind me to tell you all about Telemachus.'

'You know him?'

'Intimately. I think we will find that it won't be necessary to inflict harm upon either Odysseus or Telemachus. Just so long as we can lay our hands on Mendax.'

'They are leaving tomorrow.'

Are they now? What kind of chariot are they riding?'

'Odysseus has a red Wolseley.'

Typical. Quite typical.'

The MCC Tie looked across at the Safari Suit with an expression of affectionate contempt.

'I don't suppose, Hermes, that you possess such a thing as a short-wave wireless?''

'A report to make?'

'Don't be foolish. BBC World Service. The West Indies are playing England at Old Trajford today.'

'Playing? Playing what?'

'Cricket, you arse of a man. Cricket.'





Two

I

'The periphrastic "do" was a superfluous tense-carrier,' said Adrian. 'Semantically empty yet widely used. The major theories of the origin of the periphrastic "do" are three: One) It was derived from the influence of the corresponding use of "faire" in French. Two) It developed out of the Old English causative "do". Three) It derived from semantic development of the full factitive verb "do". An examination of these three theories should tell us much about alternative approaches to diachronic syntax and generative grammar.'

He looked across to the sofa. Trefusis was lying on his back, an overflowing ashtray on his chest, lightweight earphones around his neck and a square of mauve silk over his face, through which he managed to smoke. If it weren't for the rise and fall of the ashtray and the clouds of smoke weaving through the silk, Adrian might have thought him dead. He hoped not, this was a good essay he was reading out and he had taken a lot of trouble over it.

Friends had warned against the Philology option.

'You'll get Craddock, who's useless,' they said. 'Trefusis only teaches research students and a few select undergraduates. Do the American paper like everyone else.'

But Trefusis had consented to see him.

'The Early Middle English periphrastic "do" could occur after modals and "have" + past participle. It was essentially a second position non-modal operator mutually exclusive with "be" + past participle and incompatible with a passive format. As late as eighteen-eighteen some grammarians wrote that it was a standard alternate to the simple form, but others denounced its use in any but empathic, interrogative and negative sentences. By the mid-eighteenth century it was obsolete.'

Adrian looked up from his sheaf of papers. A brown stain was forming in Trefusis's handkerchief, as the silk filtered the smoke.

'Um . . . that's it . . .'

Silence from the sofa. Far away all the bells of Cambridge began to chime the hour.

'Professor Trefusis?'

He couldn't have slept through an essay of that quality, surely? Adrian cleared his throat and tried again, more loudly.

'Professor Trefusis?'

From under the handkerchief came a sigh.

'So.'

Adrian wiped the palms of his hands on his knees.

'Was it all right?' he asked.

'Well constructed, well researched, well supported, well argued . . .'

'Oh. Thank you.'

'Original, concise, thoughtful, perceptive, incisive, illuminating, cogent, lucid, compelling, charmingly read . . .'

'Er-good.'

'I should imagine,' said Trefusis, 'that it must have taken you almost an hour to copy out.'

'Sorry?'

'Come, come, Mr Healey. You've already insulted your own intelligence'

'Oh.'

'Val Kirstlin, Neue Philologische Abteilung, July 1973, "The Origin and Nature of the Periphrastic Verb 'Do' in Middle and Early Modern English". Am I right?'

Adrian shifted uncomfortably. It was hard enough to know what Trefusis was thinking when his face was unveiled; with a handkerchief over him he was as unreadable as a doctor's prescription.

'Look, I'm terribly sorry,' he said. 'The thing is . . .'

'Please don't apologise. Had you bothered to do any work of your own I should have been obliged to sit through it just the same, and I can assure you that I had much rather listen to a good essay than a mediocre one.'

Adrian couldn't think of an adequate reply to this.

'You have a fine brain. A really excellent brain, Mr Healey.'

'Thank you.'

'A fine brain, but a dreadful mind. I have a fine brain and a fine mind. Likewise Russell. Leavis, a good mind, practically no brain at all. Shall we continue like this, I wonder?'

'Like what?'

'This fortnightly exhibition of stolen goods. It all seems rather pointless. I don't find the pose of careless youth charming and engaging any more than you find the pose of careworn age fascinating and eccentric, I should imagine. Perhaps I should let you play the year away. I have no doubt that you will do very well in your final tests. Honesty, diligence and industry are wholly superfluous qualities in one such as you, as you have clearly grasped.'

'Well, it's just that I've been so . . .'

Trefusis pulled the handkerchief from his face and looked at Adrian.

'But of course you have! Frantically busy. Fran-tic-ally.'

Trefusis helped himself to another cigarette from a packet that lay on top of a tower of books next to the sofa and tapped it against his thumb-nail.

'My first meeting with you only confirmed what I first suspected. You are a fraud, a charlatan and a shyster. My favourite kind of person, in fact.'

'What makes you so sure?'

'I am a student of language, Mr Healey. You write with fluency and conviction, you talk with authority and control. A complex idea here, an abstract proposition there, you juggle with them, play with them, seduce them. There is no movement from doubt to comprehension, no breaking down, no questioning, no excitement. You try to persuade others, never yourself. You recognise patterns, but you rearrange them where you should analyse them. In short, you do not think. You have never thought. You have never said to me anything that you believe to be true, only things which sound true and perhaps even ought to be true: things that, for the moment, are in character with whatever persona you have adopted for the afternoon. You cheat, you short-cut, you lie. It's too wonderful.'

'With respect, Professor . . .'

'Pigswill! You don't respect me. You fear me, are irritated by me, envy me . . . you everything me, but you do not respect me. And why should you? I am hardly respectable.'

'What I mean is, am I so different from anyone else? Doesn't everyone think the way I think? Doesn't everyone just rearrange patterns? Ideas can't be created or destroyed, surely.'

'Yes!' Trefusis clapped his hands with delight. 'Yes, yes, yes! But who else knows that they are doing that and nothing else? You know, you have always known. That is why you are a liar. Others try their best, when they speak they mean it. You never mean it. You extend this duplicity to your morals. You use and misuse people and ideas because you do not believe they exist. Just patterns for you to play with. You're a hound of hell and you know it.'

'So,' said Adrian, 'what's to become of me then?'

'Ah, well. I could ask you not to bother me any more. Let you get on with your boring little life while I get on with mine. Or I could write a note to your tutor. He would send you down from the university. Either course would deprive me of the income, however nugatory, that I receive for supervising you. What to do? What to do? Pour yourself a glass of Madeira, there's Sercial or Bual on the side. Hum! It's all so difficult.'

Adrian stood and picked his way across the room.

Trefusis's quarters could be described in one word.

Books.

Books and books and books. And then, just when an observer might be lured into thinking that that must be it, more books.

Barely a square inch of wood or wall or floor was visible. Walking was only allowed by pathways cut between the piles of books. Treading these pathways with books waist-high either side was like negotiating a maze. Trefusis called the room his 'librarinth'. Areas where seating was possible were like lagoons in a coral strand of books.

Adrian supposed that any man who could speak twenty-three languages and read forty was likely to collect a few improving volumes along the way. Trefusis himself was highly dismissive of them.

'Waste of trees,' he had once said. 'Stupid, ugly, clumsy, heavy things. The sooner technology comes up with a reliable alternative the better.' '

Early in the term he had flung a book at Adrian's head in irritation at some crass comment. Adrian had caught it and been shocked to see that it was a first edition of Les Fleurs du Mai.

'Books are not holy relics,' Trefusis had said. 'Words may be my religion, but when it comes to worship, I am very low church. The temples and the graven images are of no interest to me. The superstitious mammetry of a bourgeois obsession for books is severely annoying. Think how many children are put off reading by prissy little people ticking them off whenever they turn a page carelessly. The world is so fond of saying that books should be "treated with respect". But when are we told that words should be treated with respect? From our earliest years we are taught to revere only the outward and visible. Ghastly literary types maundering on about books as "objects". Yes, that does happen to be a first edition. A present from Noel Annan, as a matter of fact. But I assure you that a foul yellow livre de poche would have been just as useful to me. Not that I fail to appreciate Noel's generosity. A book is a piece of technology. If people wish to amass them and pay high prices for this one or that, well and good. But they can't pretend that it is any higher or more intelligent a calling than collecting snuff-boxes or bubble-gum cards. I may read a book, I may use it as an ashtray, a paperweight, a doorstop or even as a missile to throw at silly young men who make fatuous remarks. So. Think again.' And Adrian had thought again.

Now he found his way back to the small clearing where Trefusis lay on his sofa blowing smoke-rings at the ceiling.

'Your very good health,' said Adrian sipping his Madeira.

Trefusis beamed at him.

'Don't be pert,' he said, 'it isn't at all becoming.'

'No, Professor.'

There followed a silence in which Adrian eagerly joined.

He had stood in many studies in his day, tracing arabesques on the carpet with his foot, while angry men had described his shortcomings and settled his future. Trefusis was not angry. Indeed he was rather cheerful. It was perfectly apparent that he couldn't care less whether Adrian lived or died.

'As your Senior Tutor, I am your moral guardian,' he said at last. 'A moral guardian yearns for an immoral ward and the Lord has provided. I shall strike a bargain with you, that's what I shall do. I am going to leave you in uninterrupted peace for the rest of the year on one condition. I want you to set to work on producing something that will surprise me. You tell me that ideas cannot be created. Perhaps, but they can be discovered. I have a peculiar horror of the cliché - there! the phrase "I have a peculiar horror" is just such a revolting expression as most maddens me - and I think you owe it to yourself, to descend to an even more nauseating phrase, to devote your energies to forging something new in the dark smithy of your fine brain. I haven't produced anything original myself in years, most of my colleagues have lived from the nappy onwards without any thought at all making the short journey across their minds, leave alone a fresh one. But if you can furnish me with a piece of work that contains even the seed of novelty, the ghost of a shred of a scintilla of a germ of a suspicion of an iota of a shadow of a particle of something, interesting and provoking, something that will amuse and astonish, then I think you will have repaid me for being forced to listen to you regurgitating the ideas of others and you will have done a proper service to yourself into the bargain. Do we have a deal?'

'I don't quite understand.'

'Perfectly simple! Any subject, any period. It can be a three-volume disquisition or a single phrase on a scrap of paper. I look forward to hearing from you before the end of term. That is all.'

Trefusis fitted the earphones over his ears and groped under the sofa for a cassette.

'Right,' said Adrian. 'Er . . .'

But Trefusis had put the handkerchief back over his face and settled back to the sound of Elvis Costello.

Adrian set down his empty glass and poked out his tongue at the reclining figure. Trefusis's hand came up and jabbed an American single-fingered salute.

Oh well, thought Adrian as he walked across Hawthorn Tree Court on his way to the porter's lodge. An original idea. That can't be too hard. The library must be full of them.

At the lodge he cleared his pigeon-hole. The largest object there was a jiffy-bag stuck with a hand-made label saying 'Toast by Post'. He opened it and a miniature serving of marmalade, two slices of soggy toast and a note fell out. He smiled: more flattering attentions from Hunt the Thimble, a relic from his days at Chartham Park a year ago. He had thought then that life at Cambridge was going to be so simple.

The note was written in an Old English Gothic which must have taken Hunt the Thimble hours to master.

'He took the bread and when he had given thanks, he toasted it and gave it to Mr Healey saying, Take, eat, this is my body which is given for you: eat this in remembrance of me. Likewise after supper he took the sachet of Marmalade and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them saying, scoff ye all of this; for this is my Marmalade of the New Testament, which is spread for you: do this as oft as ye shall taste it, in remembrance of me. Amen.'

Adrian smiled again. How old would Hunt the Thimble be now? Twelve or thirteen probably.

There was a letter from Uncle David.

'Hope you're enjoying life. How's the college doing in the Cuppers this year? Had a chance to inspect the Blues XI? Enclosed a little something. I know how mess bills can mount up...'

Mess bills? The man must be getting senile. Still, three hundred quid was surprising and useful.

'. . . I shall be in Cambridge next weekend, staying at the Garden House. I want you to visit me on Saturday night at eight. I have a proposition to put to you. Much love, Uncle David.'

The pigeon-hole was also stuffed with circulars and handbills.

'A tea-party will be held on Scholar's Lawn, St John's College, to protest at American support for the regime in El Salvador.'

'The Mummers present Artaud's The Cenci in a new translation by Bridget Arden. Incest! Violence! A play for our times in the Trinity Lecture Theatre.'

'Sir Ian Gilmour will talk to the Cambridge Tory Reform Group about his book Inside Right. Christ's College. Admission Free.'

'Dr Anderson will give a lecture to the Herrick Society entitled The Punk Ethic As Radical Outside. Non-members £i. 50.'

After a judicious binning of these and other leaflets, Adrian was left with Uncle David's cheque, the toast, a bill from Heffer's bookshop and a Barclaycard statement, both of which he opened as he walked back to his rooms.

He was astounded to discover that he owed Heffers £112 and Barclaycard £206. With the exception of one or two novels, all the books itemised on the Heffer's bill were on art history. A Thames and Hudson edition of Masaccio alone had cost £40.

Adrian frowned. The titles were very familiar, but he knew that he hadn't bought them.

He quickened his pace across the Sonnet Bridge and into the President's Court, only to charge straight into a shrivelled old don in a gown. With a cry of 'Whoops!' the man, whom he recognised as the mathematician Adrian Williams, fell sprawling on the ground, sending books and papers flying over the grass.

'Dr Williams!' Adrian helped him up. 'I am sorry . . .'

'Oh hello, Adrian,' said Williams, taking his hand and springing up to his feet. 'I'm afraid neither of us was looking where we were going. We Adrians are notoriously abstracted, are we not?'

They skipped about the lawn collecting Williams's papers.

'Do you know,' said Williams, 'I tried one of those packet soups yesterday. "Knorr" it was called, K-N-O-R-R, a very strange name indeed, but Lord, it was delicious. Chicken Noodle. Have you ever tried it?'

'Er, I don't think so,' said Adrian picking up the last of the books and handing it to Williams.

'Oh you should, you really should! Miraculous. You have a paper packet no larger than . . . well let me see . . . what is it no larger than?'

'A paperback?' said Adrian shuffling from foot to foot. Once cornered by Williams, it was very hard to get away.

'Not really a paperback, it's squarer than that. I should say no larger than a single-play record. Of course in area that probably is the same size as a paperback, but a different shape, you see.'

'Great,' said Adrian. 'Well I must be . . .'

'And inside is the most unprepossessing heap of powder you can imagine. The dried constituents of the soup. Little lumps of chicken and small hard noodles. Very unusual.'

'I must try it,' said Adrian. 'Anyway . . .'

'You empty the packet into a pan, add two pints of water and heat it up.'

'Right, well, I think I'll go to the Rat Man now and buy some,' said Adrian, walking backwards.

'No, the Rat Man doesn't sell it!' Williams said. 'I had a word with him about it this morning and he said he might get it in next week. Give it a trial period, see if there's a demand.

Sainsbury's in Sidney Street has a very large supply, however.'

Adrian had nearly reached the corner of the court."

'Sainsbury's?' he called, looking at his watch. 'Right. I should just be in time.'

'I had the happy notion of adding an egg,' Williams shouted back. 'It poaches in the soup. Not unlike an Italian stracciatella. Singularly toothsome. Oh, you'll discover that Sainsbury's display a vegetable soup on the same shelf, also made by Knorr. It's quite hard to tell the two packets apart, but be sure to get the Chicken Noodle . . .'

Adrian rounded the corner and streaked for his rooms. He could hear Williams's voice cheerily exhorting him not to let it boil, as this was certain to impair the flavour.

Perhaps that's what Trefusis meant about not lying. Williams wasn't raving about his bloody soup in order to be respected or admired, he genuinely meant to impart a sincerely felt enthusiasm. Adrian knew he could never be guilty of any such unfiltered openness but he was damned if he was going to be judged because of it.

Gary was listening to Abba's Greatest Hits and leafing through a book on Miro when Adrian came in.

'Hello, darlin',' he said. 'I've just boiled the kettle.'

Adrian went up to the stereo, took off the record and frisbee'd it out of the open window. Gary watched it skim across the Court.

'What's up with you, then?'

Adrian took the Heffers and Barclaycard bills from his pocket and spread them out on Gary's book.

'You are aware that theft, obtaining goods and monies by false pretences and forgery are all serious offences?' he said.

'I'll pay you back.'

Adrian went to his desk and opened a drawer. His Heffers card and Visa card were missing.

'I mean, you might at least have told me.'

'I wouldn't have thought of being so vulgar.'

'Well I don't want to be vulgar either, but you now owe me a grand total of . . .' Adrian leafed through his notebook, 'six hundred and eighteen pounds and sixty-three pence.'

'I said I'd pay you back, didn't I?'

'I'm busy wondering how.'

'You can afford to wait. You should be glad to do a member of the working classes a favour.'

'And you should have too much pride to allow me . . . oh for God's sake!'

The sound of Abba singing 'Dancing Queen' had started up in a room the other side of the court. Adrian slammed the window shut.

'That'll teach you to throw things out of the window,' said Gary.

'It'll teach me not to throw things out of the window.'

'Suppose I pay you back in portraits?'

Adrian looked round the room. The walls were covered with dozens of different portraits of himself. Oils, water-colours, gouaches, grisailles, pen and ink, chalk, silverpoint, charcoal, pastels, airbrushed acrylics, crayons and even Bic biro drawings, ranging in style from neo-plasticist to photorealist.

He had been given no choice in the matter of sharing rooms. Gary and he were drawn out of the tombola together, so together they were. The bondage trousers, henna'ed hair and virtual canteen of cutlery that hung from his ears told the world that Gary was a punk, the only one in St Matthew's and as such as fascinating and horrifying an addition to the college as the modern Stafford Court on the other side of the river. Gary was reading Modern and Medieval Languages, but intended to change to History of Art in his second year: meanwhile he expressed his devotion to Adrian - real or pretended, Adrian never knew which - by treating him as an idiot older brother from another world. He had never met a public school boy before coming to Cambridge and hadn't really believed that they existed. He had been more shocked by Adrian than Adrian had been by him.

'And you really used to have fagging and that?'

'Yes. It's on the way out now I believe, but when I was there you had to fag.'

'I can't bleeding believe it! Did you wear a boater?'

'When appropriate.'

'And striped trousers?'

'In the Sixth Form.'

'Fuck me!' Gary had wriggled with delight.

'I'm hardly the only one, you know. There are dozens here from my school alone, hundreds from Eton and Harrow and Winchester.'

'Yeah,' said Gary, 'but it's less than seven per cent of the population, isn't it? People like me never usually meet people like you except in a Crown Court, when you're wearing a wig.'

'This is nineteen-seventy-nine, Gary, people like you are forming the Thatcher cabinet.'

Adrian had told him about life at school, about the magazine, about Pigs Trotter's death. He had even told him about Cartwright.

Gary had immediately done a drawing of Adrian as he imagined him in a blazer and cricket whites, dawdling in front of a Gothic doorway, while capped and gowned beaks flitted in the background like crows. Adrian had bought it on the spot for ten pounds. Since then he had subsidised Gary's cannabis and vodka by buying at least three works of art a week. But he didn't now think he could take even one more view of himself, in any medium, from any angle, and he said so.

'Well then,' said Gary, 'you're going to have to wait for me to pay you back till the end of the year.'

'Yes, I suppose I am,' said Adrian. 'Oh coitus!'

'Oh come on, you can afford it.'

'No, it's not that. It's work.'

'Work? I thought this was supposed to be a university.'

'Yes, well, it's rapidly turning into a technical college,' said Adrian, falling into an armchair.

'Didn't Trefusis go for your essay then?'

'No, he loved it, that's the problem,' said Adrian. 'It was too good. He was very impressed. So now he wants me to do something major. Something startling and original.'

'Original? In philology?'

'No, any subject. I should be flattered really, I suppose.'

Honestly, what was the point? He could tell the truth to Gary, surely? He was lying as a matter of course. Was it pride? Fear? He closed his eyes. Trefusis was right. Right but ludicrously wrong.

Why wasn't he happy? Jenny loved him. Gary loved him. His mother sent him money. Uncle David sent him money. It was the May Term of his first year, the weather was fine and he had no examinations. Everything unpleasant was behind him. Cambridge was his. He had now made up his mind to stay here after Finals and become a don. All you had to do was memorise enough good essays and repeat them in three-hour bursts. Trefusis wasn't an examiner, thank God.

He hung Jeremy, his blazer, on Anthony, the peg.

'Let's have some toast,' he said. 'Hunt the Thimble has provided.'

II

'We come now gentlemen,' said President Clinton-Lacey, 'to the matter of JRFs and Bye-Fellowships. I wonder if- '

Garth Menzies, a Professor of Civil Law, coughed through a cloud of dense smoke which poured into his face from the pipe of Munroe, the Bursar.

'Excuse me, Mr President,' he said, 'I understood we had agreed to a no-smoking rule at Fellows' meetings?'

'Well, that is certainly true, yes. Admiral Munroe, I wonder if you would mind . . . ?'

Munroe banged his pipe down on the table and gave Menzies a look charged with deepest venom. Menzies smiled and transferred a sweet from one side of his mouth to the other.

'Thank you,' said Clinton-Lacey. 'Now. JRFs and Bye-Fellowships. As this body is well aware, there has been '

Munroe sniffed the air loudly.

'Excuse me, Mr President,' he said. 'Am I alone in detecting a nauseating smell of spearmint in this room?'

'Er. . .?'

'It really is most disagreeable. I wonder where it could be coming from?'

Menzies angrily took the mint from his mouth and dropped it into the ashtray in front of him. Munroe smiled beatifically.

'Thank you,' said Clinton-Lacey. 'Fellows, we have a problem in retaining our present levels of postgraduates. There is a large number of Junior Research Fellows and Bye-Fellows that benefits from our grants and disbursements as you know. You will be far from unaware of the nature of the economic weather system that blows towards us from Westminster.'

Admiral Munroe ostentatiously pushed the ashtray into the centre of the table, as if the smell of mint still offended him.

Alex Corder, a theologian down the end of the table, barked a rather harsh laugh.

'Barbarians,' he said. 'They're all barbarians.'

'The government,' said Clinton-Lacey, 'the justice of whose doctrines we are not assembled here to discourse upon, has certainly struck an attitude towards the universities which must give us cause for alarm.'

'The Prime Minister is a scientist,' said Corder.

Garth Menzies raised his eyebrows. 'I'm sure no one would accuse the Prime Minister of academic partiality.'

'Why ever not?'.said Munroe.

'Well, whatever her possible bias,' said Clinton-Lacey, 'there is a feeling in government that the Arts side, oversubscribed by candidates for entrance as it already is, must be, er, honed, and extra encouragement given to the disciplines which can more productively . . .ah! Professor Trefusis!'

Trefusis stood in the doorway, a cigarette dangling from his lips, peering vaguely as if unsure whether this was the right room or the right meeting. The sight of Menzies' disapproving glare seemed to reassure him; he entered and slid down into the empty seat next to Admiral Munroe.

'Well, Donald, I am sorry that you seem to have been delayed again,' said Clinton-Lacey.

Trefusis was silent.

'Nothing serious I hope?'

Trefusis smiled affably around the room.

'Nothing serious I hope?' repeated the President.

Trefusis became aware that he was being addressed, opened his jacket, switched off the Walkman that was attached to his belt and slipped off his earphones.

'I'm sorry, Master, did you speak?'

'Well yes ... we were discussing the fall-off in resources for the Arts.'

'The Arts?'

'That's right. Now Menzies coughed and pushed the ashtray towards Trefusis.

'Thank you, Garth,' said Trefusis, flicking the ash from his cigarette and taking another puff. 'Most thoughtful.'

The President persevered.

'We will not have enough money to create any more Junior Research Fellows in the Arts for at least two years.'

'Oh, how sad,' said Trefusis.

'You are not concerned for your department?'

'My department? My department is English, Master.'

'Well precisely.'

'What has English to do with "the Arts", whatever they may be? I deal in an exact science, philology. My colleagues deal with an exact science, the analysis of literature.'

'Oh poppycock,' said Menzies.

'No, if anything it's hard shit,' said Trefusis.

'Really, Donald!' said the President. 'I am sure there is no need . . .'

'Professor Trefusis,' said Menzies, 'this is a minuted meeting of adults, if you feel you can't preserve the decencies of debate then perhaps you should leave.'

'My dear old Garth,' said Trefusis, 'I can only say that you started it. The English language is an arsenal of weapons; if you are going to brandish them without checking to see whether or not they are loaded you must expect to have them explode in your face from time to time. "Poppycock" means "soft shit" -from the Dutch, I need scarcely remind you, pappe kak.'

Menzies purpled and fell silent.

'Well, be that all as it may, Donald,' said the President, 'the subject was resourcing. Whatever our views on the rights and wrongs of government policy, the fiscal reality is such that . . .'

'The reality,' said Trefusis, offering cigarettes around the table, 'as we all know, is that more and more young people are begging to be admitted to this college in this university to read English. Our English department receives a higher number of applicants for each available place than any other department in any other university in the country. If the rules of the market place, which I understand to be sacred to the gabies, guffoons and flubberhaddocks in office, are to apply, then surely we should be entitled to more fellowships, not fewer.'

'The feeling, Donald,' said the President, 'is that English graduates cannot offer an expertise of benefit to the country. The fruits of research in botany or genetics or even my own subject, economics, are recognised as having a palpable value to the world . . .'

'Hear, hear,' said Menzies.

'Poppycock,' said Munroe, accepting a box of matches from Trefusis.

'But you and your colleagues,' said the President, ignoring both interruptions, 'are seen more and more as an intolerable burden on the tax-payer. There is nothing for you to discover of interest, nothing you can offer your undergraduates that fits them usefully into industry or profitable enterprise. You know that those are not my views. Around this table we have rehearsed many times the arguments and counter-arguments and I do not propose to do so again. I can only tell you that the monies will not be available this year.'

'Mr President,' said a don at the end of the table, 'I would like you to register my view that this is an absolute disgrace. This Philistinism will do nothing but impoverish our country. I hope you will minute my utter disgust.'

'Well,' said Trefusis, 'that should make Sir Keith Joseph and his friends shake in their boots, shouldn't it? No, no. The time has come for action. With the Fellows' approval I can train a hand-picked company of crack undergraduates and be in Whitehall before June.'

'This pose of embittered and embattled artist,' said Menzies, 'is unseemly and out of date. Society can no longer afford its jesters and is weary of being hit over the head with empty pigs' bladders. The world is bored of the piffling excesses of the Arts, of its arrogance and irrelevance to the real world. Your fat could do with trimming.'

'You're right of course,' said Trefusis, 'I see that now. We need lawyers. Wave upon wave of them.'

'Well of course it's very easy to mock . . .'

'It's certainly easy to mock some things,' agreed Trefusis. 'Oddly enough though I've never found it easy to mock anything of value. Only things that are tawdry and fatuous - perhaps it's just me.'

III

'Sp you see my little honeypot baby-squeeze,' said Adrian, 'I have to come up with some bloody piece of research or I may be out on my rather divinely shaped ear.'

'Well it's about time you did some work,' said Jenny, biting his nipple.

'That's a horrid thing to say. Now go a bit lower down and get those lips working, it's my turn to come and I have to be off to the University Library.'

Jenny sat up.

'That reminds me,' she said. 'Mary and I have written a letter to all the Senior Tutors in Cambridge.'

'Good God,' said Adrian, pulling her head down again, 'this is no time to babble of schoolgirl crushes.'

'No listen,' she said popping up. 'It's the pornography.'

'What?'

'You know I've been going to Tim Anderson's lectures on Derrida and Sexual Difference?'

'Look, if your mouth's busy you could at least use your hands. There's some baby oil under the bed.'

'Well, he showed us some pornography last week. Boxfuls of it. From the University Library. It's a copyright library, you see, so they get a copy of everything published. Everything.'

'What, you mean . . . everything?'

'Everything. Centuries of pornography up to the present day. The cellars are packed with tons of the most degrading and disgusting . . . I'm talking about amputees, children, appliances, things you could never even imagine.'

'You don't know what I could imagine.'

'I went to have a look at some of it. All I needed was Helen Greenman's signature. Told her it was to do with Tim Anderson's lectures. Well I mean, this stuff shouldn't be at Cambridge. It has no possible academic justification. It's degrading to women and should be burnt.'

'And degrading to animals and children and appliances, I shouldn't wonder.'

'Adrian, it's not funny. I think the UL dignifies this shit by storing it. So Mary and I are trying to get it banned.'

'What sort of things did you see exactly?'

'Well you have to view it in a private room . . .'

'Describe it to me . . . and use your left hand. That's it. A bit faster. Yes! Oh yes indeed. Now, what did you see?'

'Well there was one where this woman took a pork-pie . . .'

IV

'That's the posish, Gary,' said Adrian when he had walked back from Newnham to St Matthew's. 'It's all there, a whole index expurgatorius waiting to be drooled over. And this is what the librarian needs to be shown.'

He handed him a small piece of paper on which was written:

'I authorise access to Jennifer de Woolf, an undergraduate of this college, to the following titles of Special Research Material . . .'

Underneath were listed titles of books and magazines and at the bottom was the signature, 'Helen Greenman, Senior Tutor, Newnham College'.

Gary's mouth fell open.

'Elsa and the Bull, Young Nuns, Concentration Camp Action . . . you're joking . . . My Hot Little Daughter, Hung, Young and Handsome, Tampon Tina, Fist Fuck Faggots, Clingfilm Fantasies. Clingfilm'? Bleeding Christ.' '

Adrian was rifling in the drawer of his desk.

'Too good to be missed I think you'll agree. Where are we . . . ah, yes.' He took a piece of writing-paper from his drawer. 'Now then, Gary, my old chum, my old mate, my old mucker. Do you want to knock off say . . . fifty quid from your debt? Of course you do. I want you to examine this letter, paying particular attention to the signature at the bottom.'

Gary took it.

'Dear Mr Healey, Dr Pittaway tells me that you are in need of instruction for the Philology option in the English Tripos. I have not forgotten your expertise as an umpire when we met at Chartham Park last summer and remember you as an alert young person bright with capability and promise. I would therefore be most happy to offer you what help I may. My rooms are in Hawthorn Tree Court, A3. I shall expect you at ten o'clock on Wednesday the 4th unless I hear otherwise. Please be sure to bring your mind with you. Donald Trefusis.'

'What about it?' said Gary.

'You can forge my signature, which is delicate and elegant. This scrawl can't be beyond you?'

'You dirty fucker.'

'Well quite.'

V

Adrian walked through Clare College towards the University Library. The impertinence of the building, as it launched upwards like a rocket, had always annoyed him. Compared to the feminine domed grace of Oxford's Bodleian or London's British Museum, it was hardly a thing of beauty. It strained up like a swollen phallus, trying to penetrate the clouds. The same principle as a Gothic spire, Adrian supposed. But the union of the library and the heavens would be a very secular Word-made-Flesh indeed.

He went inside and made his way up to the catalogue room. He flipped through the card indices, scribbling down hopeful titles. Everywhere grey-faced research graduates and desperate third year students with books under their arms and private worlds of scholarship in their eyes hurried back and forth. He spotted Germaine Greer clutching a pile of very old books and Stephen Hawking, the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics, steering his motor-driven chair into the next room.

Do I really have a place here? Adrian wondered. All this work? This sweat? No short cuts, no cheating, no copying out, no grafting? Of course I do. A physicist doesn't work any harder than I do. He just copies out God's ideas. And he usually gets them wrong.

Gary watched Trefusis leave his rooms, briefcase in hand, trailing a cloud of smoke. He waited until five minutes after he had crossed the Sonnet Bridge before climbing the stairs to the first floor.

The latch of the outer oak door surrendered easily to Adrian's Barclay card, as Adrian had said it would. Gary turned on the lights and surveyed the Manhattan of books before him.

It's got to be in here somewhere, he said to himself. I suppose I'll just have to wait for it to reveal itself.

Adrian went to the desk in the reading-room and waited to be noticed. It was very tempting to slap the counter and shout 'Shop!' He managed a polite cough instead.

'Sir?'

Librarians always seemed to treat Adrian with as much apathy and contempt as was possible without being openly rude. He would sometimes ask any one of the UL staff for a book written in, say, a rare dialect of Winnebago Indian, just for the hell of it, and they would hand it over with wrinkled noses and an air of superior scorn, as if they'd read it years ago and had long got over the stage where such obvious and juvenile nonsense could possibly be of the remotest interest to them. Had they somehow seen through him or was their contempt for undergraduates universal? The specimen who had come forward now seemed more than usually spotty and aloof. Adrian favoured him with an amiable smile.

'I'd like,' he said in ringing tones, 'A Fulsome Pair of Funbags and Fleshy Dimpled Botts please, and Davina's Fun with Donkeys if it's not already out... oh and Wheelchair Fellatio I think . . .'

The librarian pushed his spectacles up his nose.

'What?'

'And Brownies and Cubs on Camp, Fido Laps it Up, Drink My Piss, Bitch and A Crocodile of Choirboys. I believe that's all. Oh, The Diary of a Maryanne, too. That's a Victorian one. Here's an authorisation slip for you.'

Adrian flourished a piece of paper.

The librarian swallowed as he read it.

Tut-tut, thought Adrian. Showing Concern And Confusion. Infraction of Rule One of the Librarian's Guild. He'll be drummed out if he's not careful.

'Whose signature is this please?'

'Oh, Donald Trefusis,' said Adrian. 'He's my Senior Tutor.'

'One moment.'

The librarian moved away and showed the paper to an older man in the background.

It was like trying to get a large cheque cashed, the same whispered conferences and sly glances. Adrian turned and took a leisurely look around the room. Dozens of faces immediately buried themselves back in their work. Other dozens stared at him. He smiled benignly.

'Excuse me, Mr . . . Mr Healey, is it?'

The older librarian had approached the counter.

'Yes?'

'May I ask for what purpose you wish to look at these . . . er . . . publications?'

'Research. I'm doing a dissertation on "Manifestations of Erotic Deviancy In . . .'"

'Quite so. This appears to be Professor Trefusis's signature. However I think I should ring him up if you don't mind. Just to make sure.'

Adrian waved a casual hand.

'Oh, I'm sure he wouldn't want to be bothered about this, would he?'

'These authorisations are not usual for undergraduates, Mr Healey.'

'Adrian.'

'I would be much happier.'

Adrian swallowed.

'Well of course, if you think it's necessary. I can give you his number in college if you like. It's - '

The librarian scented triumph.

'No, no, sir. We can find it ourselves, I'm sure.'



Gary managed to track down the telephone under an ottoman. He answered it on the fifth ring.

'Yes?' he panted. 'Trefusis here, I was just taking a crap, what is it? . . . Who? ... Speak up man . . . Healey? . . . "Manifestations of Erotic Desire . . ."? Yes, Is there some problem? . . . Of course it's my signature ... I see. A little trust would not go amiss, you know. You're running a library, not a weapons depository, this bureaucracy is . . . No doubt, but that's what the guards at Buchenwald said . . . Very well, very well. You catch me in a bad mood this morning, take no notice . . . All right. Goodbye then.'

'That appears to be fine, Mr Healey. You appreciate that we had to make sure?'

'Of course, of course.'

The librarian gulped.

'These will take some time to . . . er . . . locate, sir. If you'd like to come back in half an hour? We'll provide a private reading-room for you.'

'Thank you,' said Adrian. 'Most kind.'

He bounced springily along the corridor on his way down to the tea-room.

I can fool all of the people all of the time, he thought.

A man walked past him.

'Morning, Mr Healey.'

'Morning, Professor Trefusis,' said Adrian.

Trefusis! Adrian skidded to a halt. He was heading for the reading-room! Not even Trefusis could answer his telephone at St Matthew's and be in the UL at the same time.

He tried to shout after him but could manage only a hoarse whisper.

'Professor! . . . Professor!'

Trefusis had reached the door. He turned in surprise.

'Yes?'

Adrian ran up to him.

'Before you go in, sir, I wondered if I could have a word?'

'Very well. What is it?'

'Can I buy you a bun in the tea-room?'

'What?'

'Well, I wondered . . . are you going in for a book or to do some work?'

'To do some work as it happens.'

'Oh, I shouldn't if I were you.'

Trefusis smiled.

'You've tried it and find it a disagreeable pursuit? I'm afraid in my case it has to be done. Someone, after all, has to write articles for future undergraduates to copy out.'

He put his hand to the finger-plate of the door.

Adrian only just managed to stop himself from tugging at his sleeve.

'Full. Not a reading table to be had. That's why I wanted to speak to you. Wondered if you could show me a good place to work.'

'Well, I find the ninth-floor reading-room is generally free from distraction. You might try there. However I am bound to say that I would feel a little bothered working in the same room as you. I'll go and see if there are any private rooms free on this floor, I think.'

He pushed against the door. Adrian practically screamed.

'No that's all right, sir! You go to the ninth floor. I've just remembered, I've got to go anyway. Got a . . . meeting.'

Trefusis came away from the door, amused.

'Very well. I am greatly looking forward to your masterwork, you know. People think our subject is airy-fairy, namby-pamby, arty, not to put too fine a point on it, farty. But as you are no doubt discovering, it is grind and toil from Beowulf to Blooms-bury. Grind, grind, grind. Toil, toil, toil. I like the Kickers. Good morning.'

Adrian looked down at his shoes. They were indeed smart.

'Thank you, Professor. And your brogues are a riot.'

With breathless relief he watched Trefusis disappear round the corner towards the lifts.

Adrian got back to St Matthew's to find that Gary had pushed all the furniture back to the walls and cleared the floor, which was covered with a vast sheet onto which he was drawing in charcoals.

'How'd it go?'

'Fabulous. Like a breeze. Did you put a handkerchief in your mouth?'

'Nah! If there's one thing Trefusis sounds like, it's a man with no handkerchief in his mouth. I just went up two octaves and sounded pissed off.'

Adrian scrutinised Gary's activities.

'So. Second question. What are you doing to my room?'

'Our room.'

'Our room, that I furnish and pay for?'

'This is a cartoon.'

'A cartoon.'

'In the original sense.'

'So the original sense of cartoon is "total fucking mess" is it?'

'The original sense of cartoon is a sheet of material onto which you draw the outlines of your fresco.'

Adrian picked his way through the debris and poured himself a glass of wine from a half-empty bottle on the mantelpiece. A half-empty bottle of the college's best white burgundy, he noted.

'Fresco?'

'Yeah. When I've designed it, I simply hang the sheet over the wall, prick the outline onto the wet plaster and get to work as quickly as possible before . . .'

'What wet plaster would that be?'

Gary pointed to a blank space of wall.

'I thought there. We just rip off the old plasterwork, bit of bonding on the laths, and Bob's your uncle.'

'Bob is not my uncle. I have never had an uncle called Bob. I never intend to have an uncle called Bob. If being Bob's nephew involves destroying a five-hundred-year-old . . .'

'Six hundred years actually. It's going to be a representation of Britain in the late seventies. Thatcher, Foot, CND marches, unemployment. Everything. I paint it, then we cover it with wood panelling. That's the expensive bit. The panelling will have to be hinged, see? In a hundred years' time this room will be priceless.'

'It's already priceless. Couldn't we leave it as it is? Henry James had tea here. Isherwood made love to a choral scholar in that very bedroom. A friend of Thomas Hardy's committed suicide here. Marlowe and Kydd danced a galliard on these exact floorboards.'

'And Adrian Healey commissioned Gary Collins's first fresco here. History is an on-going process.'

'And what's our bedder going to say?'

'It'll brighten her day. Better than picking up the manky Y-fronts of the economists opposite.'

'Fuck you, Gary. Why do you always make me sound so prissy and middle-class?'

'Bollocks.'

Adrian looked round the room and tried to fight down his bourgeois panic.

'So, hinged panelling, you say?'

'Shouldn't cost too much if that's what you're worrying about. I picked up this builder who's working on the site of Robinson College. He reckons he can get me some good stuff for under five hundred and he'll do all the rendering and plastering for free if I let him fuck me.'

'Not exactly in the great tradition is it? I mean, I don't think that Pope Julius and Michelangelo came to a similar kind of arrangement about the Sistine Chapel. Not unless I'm very much mistaken.'

'Don't bet on it. Anyway, someone's got to fuck me, haven't they?' Gary pointed out. 'Since you won't I've got to look elsewhere. Makes good sense.'

'Suddenly the whole logic becomes clear. But what about work? I'm supposed to be working this term, don't forget.'

Gary got to his feet and stretched.

'Bugger that, that's what I say. How was the porn?'

'Incredible. You've never in all your life seen anything like it.'

'Naughty pictures?'

'I'm not sure I'm ever going to be able to look a labrador in the face again. But, ruined as my faith in humankind may be, I have to say that we of the twentieth century are a pretty normal bunch compared to the Victorians.'

'Victorian porn?'

'Certainly.'

'What did they do} I've often wondered. Did they have dicks and fannies and the rest of it?'

'Well of course they did, you silly child. And the zestier volumes indicate that they had a great deal more. There's a - '

Adrian broke off. He had suddenly given himself an idea. He looked at Gary's cartoon.

Why not? It was wild, it was dishonest, it was disgraceful, but it could be done. It would mean work. A hell of a lot of work, but work of the right kind. Why not?'

'Gary,' he said. 'I suddenly find myself at life's crossroads. I can feel it. One road points to madness and pleasure, the other to sanity and success. Which way do I turn?'

'You tell me, matey.'

'Let me put it this way. Do you want to pay off all your debt in one, plus the five hundred for wooden panelling? I've got a job for you.'

'Okay.'

'That's my boy.'

Trefusis approached the counter of the reading-room. The young librarian looked at him in surprise.

'Professor Trefusis!'

'Good morning! How wags the world with you today?'

'I'm very fit thank you, sir.'

'I wonder if you can help me?'

'That's what I'm here for, Professor.'

Trefusis leant forward and lowered his voice conspiratorially, not an easy task for him. Among his many gifts he had never been able to count speaking in hushed tones.

'Oblige the whim of a man old and mad before his time,' he said, quietly enough for only the first twelve rows of desks behind him to catch every word, 'and tell me if there is any reason why I shouldn't have come in here an hour ago?'

'Pardon?'

'Why should I not have come into this room an hour ago? Was something afoot?'

The librarian stared. A man who services academics is used to all forms of mental derangement and behavioural aberration. Trefusis had always struck him as blithely and refreshingly free from nervous disorder. But, as the saying had it, old professors never die, they merely lose their faculties.

'Well apart from the fact that an hour ago you couldn't have been here . . .'he said.

'I couldn't?'

'Well not while you were at St Matthew's talking to Mr Leyland on the telephone.'

'I was talking to Mr Leyland on the telephone?' said Trefusis. 'Of course I was! Dear me, my memory . . . Leyland rang me up, didn't he? On the telephone, as I recall. That's right, it was the telephone, I remember distinctly, because I spoke to him through it. He rang me up, on the telephone, to talk to me about. . . about. . . what was it now?'

'To check your authorisation for that undergraduate to read those . . . those Reserved Publications.'

'Mr Healey that would have been?'

'Yes. It was all right, wasn't it? I mean, you did confirm . . .'

'Oh yes. Quite all right, quite all right. I was merely . . . humour me once more and let me have a copy of the titles Mr Healey wanted to see, would you, dear boy?'

VI

'Bust me, Sir!' said Mr Polterneck. 'Bust me if I haven't just the little warmint for your most partic'lar requirements just now a-curling up in innocent slumber in the back room. You can bounce me from here to Cheapside if that ain't the truest truth that ever a man gave utterance of. Mrs Polterneck knows it to be so, my Uncle Polterneck knows it to be so and any man as is acquainted with me could never be conwinced to the contrary of it, not if you boiled him and baked him and twisted him on the rack for another opinion.'

'I am assured of your good faith in this matter?' asked Peter.

'Lord, Mr Flowerbuck. I'm in the way of weeping that you might have doubt of it! My good faith in this matter is the one sure fact you may most particular be assured of! My good faith is a flag, Mr Flowerbuck. It is a tower, Sir, a Monument. My good faith is not made of air, Mr Flowerbuck, it is an object such as you might touch and look upwards on with wonder and may you whip me until I bleed if that ain't so.'

'Then I suppose we might do business?'

'Now then, Sir,' said Mr Polterneck, producing a most preposterous handkerchief of bright vermilion silk with which he mopped his brow. 'He's a most especial warmint, is Joe Cotton. Most particular especial. To a gentleman like yourself as I can tell is most discerning in the nature of young warmints, he is a nonparelly. I could sonnet you sonnets, Mr Flowerbuck, about the gold of his tresses and the fair smoothness of his young skin. I could ballad you ballads, Sir, on the theme of the fair round softness of his rump and the garden of paradise that awaits a man within. I've a stable of young colts, Sir, as I can say the like would not be found in any district of the City, nor without the City too, and Master Cotton, Sir, is my Prize. If that ain't recommendation enough you can hang me by the neck right now, Sir, from old Uncle Polterneck's lintel, and have done with me for a lying rascal.'

It was all Peter could do to restrain himself from taking Polterneck fully at his word. The fear of what foul gases might ooze from the creature's lungs as he did so and what contamination he would suffer in the handling of him kept his vengeful fury at bay quite as much as the reflection that he must proceed as levelly as he might with the business in hand.

'I suppose you can tell me nothing of his provenance?' he asked indifferently.

'As to his provenance, Sir, I'm in the way of thinking, and Mrs Polterneck is the same, and Uncle Polterneck is hardly of a different persuasion, that he was sent down from Heaven, Sir. Sent down from Heaven itself to put bread in the mouths of my kinfolk and give pleasure and boon to gentlemen such as yourself, Sir. That is my opinion of his provenance and the man ain't been given birth to who could shake me out of it. You never seen such beauty in a lad, Sir. And how he's all compliance and skill in the Art he has been called to! A wonder to see him set to work, Sir. They say a young sister was sent down with him.'

'A girl? His twin, perhaps?'

'Well, now that you are in the line of remarking on the matter, I did hear mention as how the girl was his twin, Sir! A golden beauty of like complexion, for those that admires the same in the gentle sex. Where she might be, I have no knowledge, nor interest neither. Young cock-chicks is my game, Sir, the hen-birds is too devilish tickerly a proposition for a peaceable gentleman like myself. Bust me if they don't start a-breeding and a-parting with chicks of their own afore they've paid their way and how,' wheezed Mr Polterneck, 'is a man of business to procure the blessing of prosperity for his hearth when his stock is all a-laid up and a-breeding?'

'So you have no knowledge of this sister's whereabouts?'

'As to Whereabouts, whereabouts is different to provenance, Sir. Whereabouts is Mystery, and ask Mrs Polterneck and Uncle Polterneck if I don't deal in nothing but certainty. The whereabouts of Miss Judith is in doubt, the whereabouts of Master Joe is in the back room. If you are needful of a pretty little lady . . .'

'No, ho. Your Joe will do.'

'Indeed, Sir, as I hope he will do.'

'As for price?'

'Ah now, Mr Flowerbuck,' said Polterneck, wagging a greasy finger. 'Seeing as we're agreed on the warmint's celestial provenance, I can't have my proper say in the affair of Fees. If he was my own I'd say a crown, and Mrs Polterneck and Uncle Polterneck would cry that I was a-cheating myself cruel and I would shake my head sorrowful and raise the fee another crown to please 'em! I should happily settle at that price, though Mrs P. and Uncle P. would complain I was cheating myself still. I was born generous and: I can't help it and won't give apology to no man for it. But for all I can cheat myself, Mr Flowerbuck, I can't be cheating Heaven! It wouldn't be right, Sir. I could rob myself with a will an it pleased my gentlemen, for my customers is all to me, but I can't go robbing the Angels, Mr Flowerbuck, I can't. It ain't in me to do so. A full sovereign for the evening, back again by six next morning.'

Peter forbore once more to put a period to the rottenest life in the rottenest den in the rottenest borough in the rottenest city in all the rotten world. He pressed a coin into Polterneck's hand.

'Bring the boy to me!' he whispered.

Polterneck clapped his hands.

'Flinter!'

In the shadows at the back of the room a figure rose from out the straw. It was the figure of a boy, no older in appearance than fourteen years, although in a city where children of six have the eyes and gait of old men, indeed the same life of experience to look back upon, and where youths of twenty are so kept back in growth by filth and hunger that they retain the aspect of frail infants, it was impossible for Peter to determine the true age of this specimen. But that was never his concern, for his eyes were ever fixed upon the face. Or upon the part where the face ought by rights to have been. For it was not a face he fixed his gaze upon. A face, my Lords and Ladies and fine gentlemen, has eyes, does it not? A face must boast ears, a mouth, some arrangement of all the features that sniff and see and hear and taste before it can lay claim to that title. That they sniff the stench of villainy, see the deepest shame, hear the most degraded blasphemies and taste aught but the bitterest sorrows - that is never the face's affair! The face presents these organs each set in their place to look at what they will and listen where they please. What countenance deserves the name therefore -my lords who look upon gold plate, my ladies who breathe fine perfumes, my friends who taste plump mutton and hear the sweet harmony of a loving voice - what face can be called a face which has not a nose set upon it? What term might we invent to describe a face whose nose is all ate up? A face with a hole in its middle where a nose should have stood - be it a nose pinched and long, swollen and bulbous, or Roman and aloof, be it any kind of nose plain or pretty - a face, I say, with a black nullity where nostrils and bridge should be presenting themselves for admiration or disgust, that is no face but the face of Shame, no countenance but the countenance of Want. It is the visage of Sin and Lust, the aspect of Need and Despair but not - I beg the favour of your believing me - not, an hundred times never, the face of a human child.

'Flinter! Fetch down young Joe for the gentleman. And Flinter! don't you never dream of touching no part of him neither, or bust me if you don't find your head a suddenly lacking of two ears also!'

Polterneck turned to Peter with an indulgent smile, for all the world as if to say 'Bless my buttons if I don't lavish more care on my young lads than they deserve!' He must then have caught sight of the expression of revulsion and horror on Peter's face, for he hastened to whisper an explanation.

'The pox, Mr Flowerbuck! The pox is a sore trial in my line of working. He was a good worker was Master Flinter and nor I don't have the heart to dismiss him now the pox has taken away his smeller.'

'I should imagine,' said Peter, 'that . . .'

'Slow down, for God's sake,' said Gary. 'My fucking wrist is about to drop off.'

Adrian stopped pacing the room.

'Sorry,' he said. 'I was getting carried away. What do you reckon so far?'

'Not sure about "bulbous".'

'You're right. I'll check it tomorrow.'

'It's two o'clock in the morning and I'm about to run out of ink. I'm going to crash.'

'Finish the chapter?'

'In the morning.'

In a service-station car-park off the Stuttgart - Karlsruhe Autobahn, a Tweed Jacket and a dark Blue Marks & Spencer's Leisure Shirt were licking their wounds.

'I just can't believe it,' the Leisure Shirt was saying. 'I mean out of nowhere and for what?'

'Perhaps they fancy themselves as latter day highway robbers,' offered the Tweed.

'Well that greasy one in a safari suit wasn't exactly my idea of a Dick Turpin.'

'No,' said the Tweed. He looked at the Leisure Shirt, who had turned away and started kicking a tree stump.

'Why did I have to go and suggest what is obviously the most secluded bloody service-station on the whole sodding Autobahn?

'I blame myself, Adrian, I should have parked nearer the main building, I do hope you are all right?'

Well they didn't take my passport or wallet, at least. In fact as far as I can see they didn't take anything.'

'Notquite true.'

The Tweed gestured forlornly towards the back seat of the Wolseley.

'My briefcase, I regret to say.'

'Oh. Anything in it?'

'Some papers.'

'Phew. Lucky escape then, I suppose. Shall we call the police?'





Three

I

At the front of the tractor, fed from its power-take-off, was a picker. A conveyor belt ran along the side and disgorged the potatoes onto a rolling rack. Adrian and Lucy's job was to 'dress' them, to pull out the rotten, green or squashed potatoes as they trundled on their way to Tony, who stood at the end of the line, bagging the survivors. Every twenty or thirty minutes they would stop and unload a dozen full sacks into a pile in the middle of the field.

It was revolting work. The rotten and the good looked alike, so Lucy and Adrian had to pick up and examine each potato that jigged and bounced along in front of them. The bad ones burst under the slightest pressure, exploding in a squelch of stinking mucus. When it rained, mud sprayed up from the wheels and spattered their faces and clothes; when it was dry, clouds of dust choked them and matted their hair. The endless clanking, grinding, whining roar could have been the soundtrack for one of those Hieronymous Bosch visions of Hell, Adrian thought, where the moaning damned stand with their hands over their ears while demons frolic gleefully around them, probing their intimate parts with forks.

But in hell the inmates would at least try to strike up conversations with each other, hard as it might be to make themselves heard above the rumble of the treadmills and the roar of the furnaces. Lucy and Tony, brother and sister, never said a word to Adrian beyond a "Ning' when he turned up, freezing, at dawn and a "Nernight, then' at dusk when, stiff as a statue, he mounted his bicycle to pound wearily home to bath and bed.

Lucy just stared at the potatoes. Tony just stared at his bagging apparatus. Sometimes Adrian caught them staring at each other, in a manner which reminded him of the joke definition of a Cotswold virgin: an ugly girl under twelve who can run faster than her brother.

Lucy was no beauty, but if the looks she exchanged with Tony were anything to go by, Adrian guessed that she was no sprinter either.

The fact that he was expected to work at all in the Easter holidays had come as a blow. He was quite used to being told to find a job for the summer: waiting on tables at the Cider With Rosie restaurant, folding bolts of baize at the wool factory, treadling the cardboard-box machine at the ICI plant in Dur-sley, picking currants at Uley, feeding the birds at the Wildfowl Trust in Slimbridge.

'But Easter!' he had moaned into his cereal, the first morning of the holidays. 'No, Mother, no!'

'You're fifteen, darling! Most boys of your age like the idea of some kind of light work. Father thinks it's a good idea.'

'I know he does, but I've already got work to do. My school project.' Adrian was thinking of the article he had promised Bullock he would write for the school underground magazine.

'He doesn't want you wasting your time loafing around indoors.'

'That's pretty rich coming from him. He spends the whole bloody year cooped up in his sodding laboratory.'

'That's not fair, Ade. You know it isn't.'

'I've never had to get a job in the Easter hols before.'

His mother poured herself a fourth cup of tea.

'Won't you try it for me, darling? See how it goes?'

'Well it just means I'll have to write my essay over the Easter weekend, doesn't it? Or am I expected to pick bloody potatoes all through the most important sacred festival in the whole bloody Christian bloody calendar as well?'

'Of course not, darling. I'm sure you'll enjoy working for Mr Sutcliffe, he's a very nice man. And Father will be so pleased.'

She brushed his cheek with the back of her hand. But Adrian wasn't going to take it gracefully. He stood up and washed his bowl under the tap.

'Don't bother, darling. Betsy will do that.'

'It's a bloody swizz. I mean, it's cricket next term. I've got to get some practice in.'

'Well I'm sure you'll get nice and fit at the farm, dear.'

'That's not the same as practising is it?'

'Don't whine, Ade. It's a very ugly sound. And I must say I'm not sure I know where this sudden enthusiasm for sports comes from, dear. Mr Mountford said in your report that you failed to attend a single rugby game or a single PE lesson last term.'

'Cricket's different,' said Adrian. 'I mean, you send me off to school for most of the year and then as soon as I come back you can't wait to get rid of me. I just hope you won't both be surprised if I lock you in an old people's home when you're old and smelly.'

'Darling! Don't be horrid.'

'And I'll only come and visit you to give you work to do. Shirts to iron and socks to darn.'

'Ade, that's an awful thing to say!'

'And only then will you know what it's like to be unloved by your own flesh and blood!' said Adrian, drying his hands. 'And don't giggle woman, because it isn't funny!'

'No darling, of course it isn't,' his mother said with her hand over her mouth.

'Oh I give up,' he had said and put a tea-towel on her head. 'I bloody give up.'

Human spirit, or lack of it, is such that, foul as the work was, Adrian found himself so lulled by the routine that sometimes the hours would pass like minutes. He tried hard to concentrate on composing in his head his contribution for the magazine. But he was always being distracted by other thoughts. He found himself playing a drama in which he cast himself as God and the potatoes as humans. This one he hurled into outer darkness, that one he sent to be garnered home.

'Well done, thou good and faithful spud, you may go to your reward.' ,

'Sinner! Corrupted one. I pluck thee out, I pluck thee out. Look, with a spot I damn thee.'

He wasn't sure if it was better to be a rotten potato or a healthy one, whether he would rather be safely bunched up in a warm bag with the goody-goodies or be thrown over the side and ploughed back into the soil. One thing was certain, either of those fates was preferable to being God.

The green potatoes were especially interesting. Donald Sut-cliffe, the farmer, had explained them to him one lunchtime.

'Spuds have to grow underground, see. If they poke up through the soil and catch the rays of the sun you'll get photosynthesis and that gives you chlorophyll which'll turn them green. A green potato is a relative of Woody Nightshade. Not as poisonous, but he won't do you any good.'

This immediately made Adrian think that he was a green potato and Cartwright was the sun.

I have been kissed by the light and transformed, he thought. I am dangerous and God has rejected me.

He was always doing that these days. Everything he saw became a symbol of his own existence, from a rabbit caught in headlights to raindrops racing down a window-pane. Perhaps it was a sign that he was going to become a poet or a philosopher: the kind of person who, when he stood On the sea-shore, didn't see waves breaking on a beach, but saw the surge of human will or the rhythms of copulation, who didn't hear the sound of the tide but heard the eroding roar of time and the last moaning sigh of humanity fizzing into nothingness. But perhaps it was a sign, he also thought, that he was turning into a pretentious wanker.

On the last working day before Easter, Maundy Thursday, the four of them had been loading bags onto the trailer in thickening twilight when Adrian caught sight of a gathering of huge birds, as black as priests, pecking at rotten potatoes at the further end of the field.

'Look at the size of those crows!' he had cried.

'Boy,' said Mr Sutcliffe, tugging at a sack, 'when you see a load of crows together, them's rooks. And when you see a rook on its own, that's a fucking crow.'

'Oh,' said Adrian. 'Right. But supposing a rook gets lost or wanders off by itself. What would you call that?'

Mr Sutcliffe roared with laughter.

'Well I don't know about you, lad, but I'd call it a crook!'

II

'A SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL'

or

'The Education of an English Gentleman'

by

Woody Nightshade

The Daisy Chain Club is exclusive. Exclusive because you can only join if you sleep in a junior dormitory, one without cubicles. It isn't hard to become a member. Membership is enforced. If one person refuses, the club cannot meet.

The rules are simply learnt. After lights out you stretch out your right hand until it finds your neighbour's membrum virile. The same is being done to you by the boy on your left. At a given signal from the President of the club (always the Prefect whose duty it is to have to sleep in a junior dormitory), it's all hands to the pumps and last one home's on the bathroom-cleaning roster for a week.

It's a calm, civilised and amiable club, The Daisy Chain. There are ones like it in every house in the school and in every public school in the land. An acquaintance from Ampleforth tells me of the Hot Cupboard Society, another from Rugby of the Milkshake Club, whose name speaks for itself. A Wykhamist friend told me of a pursuit at Winchester called the Biscuit Game. The players stand around in a circle tossing off onto a Wholemeal Digestive. The last one to spit his stuff on the biscuit eats it. A new kind of cream filling well in advance of anything McVitie's have got round to thinking of. Packed with potassium and vitamins, too.

From time to time news of these little entertainments leaks out. A careless word from Bletchley-Titherton to his older sister, a letter home from a young Savonarola and the whistle is "blown. There follow tears, recriminations and hasty expulsions.

This is strange. Let's face it boys, most of our fathers went, if not to this school, at least to others like it. Most of the staff too. Milk-Shake Clubs and their like are as old as the chapel steps.

But this is England, where the only crime is to he Pound Out.

'My dear old fellow, we all know what goes on hut it really doesn't do to shout about it. Upsets the apple-cart, muddies the water, what?'

I can't help thinking of the House of Commons. Six hundred or so men, most of them public school. They pronounce daily on the moral evils of the world, hut just think my dears, just think of the things they have done and continue to do to their bodies and the bodies of others.

We are being groomed for power. In twenty years' time we will see fellow members of The Daisy Chain Club on television talking about oil prices, giving the Church's viewpoint on the IRA, presenting Blue Peter, closing down factories, handing down severe sentences from the bench.

Or will we?

The world is changing. We grow our hair long, we take drugs. How many people reading this have not smoked cannabis on school premises? We are not very interested in power, we are very interested in putting the world right.

Now that is really intolerable. No my-dear-old-fellowing for that kind of crime.

The Daisy Chain Club may provoke tears, recriminations, hasty expulsions and even hastier cover-ups and laughings-off. But long hair, pot and real rebellion, they provoke anger, hatred and madness. When young people shag each other off in the dorms they are engaging in a charming old custom, a time-honoured ritual: the only reason that there are expulsions is that the tradition is hard to explain to tearful mothers and snide newspapers. But when boys say that they would rather be drummers than barristers, gardeners than businessmen, poets than soldiers, that they don't think much of examinations and authority and marriage, that when they are of age they intend to remake the world to fit them, not remake themselves to fit the world, then there is Trouble.

Someone once said that Capitalism is the exploitation of man by man and Communism is the exact reverse. I expect most of us agree with that. I don't know any schoolboy Communists, but I do know hundreds of schoolboy revolutionaries.

In the 60s the ideal was to overthrow by force. I don't know if you've seen the film 'If...' I doubt it, every year the cinema club tries to show it and every year Headman forbids it. The film ends with a band of schoolboys turning into guerillas and assassinating parents and staff. People said that although it was set in a school it was supposed to be a metaphor for real life. Well I don't know about you, but for me school is real life. And probably will be for years. I have no interest in shooting any of the masters dead of course (well, no more than two or three, tops), but I have a lot of interest in challenging their authority. Not wresting it from them, necessarily, but challenging it. Asking where it comes from, how it is earned. If we are told that it is earnt on the basis of age and strength alone, then we know what kind of world we are living in and I hope we will know what to do about it. We are always being asked to show respect. Well, we can show respect with the best of them, what we find it hard to do is to feel respect.

Our generation, the 70s Generation, is calling for a social revolution, not a pol -

'Adrian!'

'Oh, bollocks!'

'We're ready to go now, darling.'

'Go? Go where?' shouted Adrian.

'To church, of course.'

'But you said I didn't have to!'

'What?'

Adrian came out of his room and looked down into the hall. His mother and father were standing by the door swathed in their dominical best.

'I'm in the middle of my school project. You said I didn't have to go to church.'

His father snorted.

'Don't be ridiculous! Of course you do.'

'But I was working . . .'

'You'll put on a tie and come down now!'

III

'You're a fucking maniac,' said Tom. '

'You're a fucking maniac,' said Adrian.

'We're all fucking maniacs,' said Bullock.

They were in Bullock and Sampson's study leafing through copies of Bollocks!

The trunk they sat on felt to them like a powder keg. It contained seven hundred copies ready for. distribution.

'Come on kids,' Bullock had said when Adrian had suggested the title at the end of the previous term, 'BUM is much better. Bullock's Underground Magazine. Bollocks is my nickname for God's sake. Everyone will know I had something to do with it.'

'That's the whole idea, my little love-noodle,' Adrian had replied. 'No one is going to believe that Brainy Bollocks himself would be so stupid as to name a subversive underground magazine after himself.'

So Bollocks! it was. There was no artwork because only Sampson and Tom had much skill at drawing and their styles were too readily identifiable.

The magazine they now looked through was a simple fifteen pages of gestetnered typescript on green paper. No handwriting, no illustrations or distinguishing characteristics of any kind. It could have been done by any person or persons in any House in the school. Bullock had had no trouble typing and reproducing the stencils in total secrecy at home.

After many crossings-out and changes of direction, Adrian's piece had been sent off to Bullock's address in Highgate the Tuesday after Easter: reading it back now he found it rather tame and half-hearted next to the libretto of a rock opera on school life that Bullock had contributed and Tom's frankly hairy analysis of the heroin counter-culture in The Naked Lunch. Sampson's allegory of red and grey squirrels was simply incomprehensible.

'Now,' said Tom, 'we face the problemette of distribution.'

'More of a problemola than a problemette,' said Bullock.

'A problerama, even,' said Sampson.

'I'd go so far as to call it a problemellaroni,' said Bullock.

'It's a real cunt,' said Tom, 'no question.'

'I don't know though,' said Adrian, 'we've all been on cube calls, haven't we? We should know how to break into the Houses.'

'I've never been on one actually,' said Sampson.

'Well, I've been on plenty,' said Adrian. 'In fact, I believe I hold the House record.'

Discipline is a sensitive subject in public schools; the flogging of offenders, the toasting of small boys in front of fires, the forcing of uncomfortable objects up their bottoms, the hanging of them upside down by their ankles, all these cruel and unusual forms of punishment had died out at Adrian's school by the time he arrived. Headman sometimes flicked a cane, masters gave lines, detentions or remissions of privilege and prefects gave cube calls, but imaginative violence and cunning torture were things of the past. It had been three years since a boy had been emptied upside down in a lavatory or had his dick slammed in a desk. With this kind of leniency and liberalism in sentencing in bur premier educational establishments, many thought that it was no wonder the country was going to the dogs.

When the cube call, whose violence was bureaucratic rather than physical, had been invented, no one could say. A single cube call was a small slip of paper given by a prefect to an offender. It contained the name of another prefect, always from another House. A double cube call contained two names of two different prefects, again from two different Houses. Adrian was the only boy in living memory who had been given a sextuple cube call.

The recipient of the call had to get up early, change into games clothes, run to the House of the first prefect on the list, enter the prefect's cubicle, wake him up and get him to sign next to his name. Then on to the next prefect on the list, who was usually in a House right at the other end of the town. When all the signatures had been collected, it was back to his own House and into uniform in time for breakfast at ten to eight. So that offenders couldn't cheat by going round in the most convenient geographical order, or by getting up before seven o'clock, the official start time, the prefects on the list had to put down the exact time at which they were woken up next to their signatures.

Adrian detested cube calls, though a psychologist might have tried to persuade him otherwise, considering how far out of his way to collect them he seemed to go. He thought it an illogical form of punishment, as irritating for the prefects who were shaken from their slumbers as for the offenders.

The system was open to massive abuse. Prefects could settle scores with colleagues they disliked by sending them cube callers every day for a week. Tit-for-tat cube call wars between prefects could go on like this for whole terms. In Adrian's House, Sargent had once had a feud with a prefect in Dashwood House called Purdy. On every day of one horrendous week Adrian had collected single cube calls from Sargent for absurd minor offences: whistling in his study during prep; having his hands in his pockets while watching a match; failing to cap a retired schoolmaster who had been walking down the High Street and whom Adrian had never even had pointed out to him before as a cappable entity. On each of Sargent's cube calls that particular week Purely's had been the name listed. On the fifth day Adrian had sidled apologetically into Purdy's cube to find it empty.

'The bird had flown, my old love,' he had tried to explain to Sargent when returning his unsigned chit. 'But I did abstract Purdy's sponge-bag from his bedside, just to prove that I was in his cube.'

That afternoon Sargent and Purdy had fought each other on the Upper. After that Adrian was left alone.

Of course prefects could do each other favours as well.

'Oh Hancock, there's a not-half scrummy scrum-half in your Colts Fifteen, what's his name?'

'What, Yelland you mean?'

'That's the one. Rather fabulous. You . . . er . . . couldn't find your way clear to sending him over one morning, could you? As a little cubie?'

'Oh all right. If you'll send me Finlay.'

'Done.'

Adrian as a new boy had been startled to find, on his first ever cube call, that the prefect whose signature he needed slept naked with only one sheet to cover him and was extremely hard to wake up.

'Excuse me, Hollis, Hollis!' he had squeaked desperately in his ear.

But Hollis had just groaned in his sleep, rolled an arm over him and pulled him into his bed.

The only really enjoyable part of the cube call for Adrian was the burglary. Officially all the Houses were locked until seven, which was supposed to make it pointless to set off early on a cube call and take the thing at a leisurely pace. But there were larder, kitchen and changing-room windows that could be prised open and latches that could yield to a flexible sheet of mica. Once inside all you had to do was creep up to the dorm, tiptoe into the target prefect's cube, adjust his alarm clock and wake him. That way you could start the call at half past five or six and save yourself all the flap and hurry of trying to complete it in forty minutes.

'Yup,' Adrian told Bullock. 'Don't you worry your pretty little head about it. I reckon I know a way into every House.'



Two days later the whole school awoke to Bollocks!

From three in the morning until half past six, Tom, Adrian, Bullock and Sampson, working from maps and instructions drawn up by Adrian, had invaded the Houses and left copies in studies, common rooms, libraries and in piles at the foot of staircases. They had seen no one and been seen by no one. They had come down to breakfast in their House as apparently amazed and excited by the appearance of the magazine as everyone else.

In school, before morning chapel, they joined the knots of people under the noticeboards in the colonnade, twittering about its contents and trying to guess who the authors were.

He had been wrong to worry that the sophistication of the others' contributions would outshine his. His brand of salacious populism was far more interesting to the school than the recondite pedantry of Bullock and Sampson, and much less aggressive than Tom's style of Open Field Beat. The most feverish speculation of the day centred around the identity of Woody Nightshade. Everywhere Adrian went he heard snatches of his article being quoted.

'Hey there, Marchant. Fancy a quick round of the Biscuit Game?'

'They can chop off your hair, my children, but they can't chop off your spirit. We are winning and they know it.'

'A school isn't an ante-room for real life, it is real life.'

'Passive resistance!'

'Let's set our own syllabus. Fail their exams, pass our own.'

The school had never known anything like this. At the eleven o'clock break on the morning of its appearance there was no other topic of conversation in the Butteries.

'Go on, admit it, Healey,' Heydon-Bayley said to Adrian, his mouth full of cream-slice, 'it was you wasn't it? That's what everyone's saying.'

'That's odd, someone told me it was you,' said Adrian.

He found it achingly frustrating not to be able to crow about his part in it. Bullock, Sampson and Tom revelled in the anonymity, but Adrian longed for applause and recognition. Even jeering and hissing would have been something. He wondered if Cartwright had read his article. What would he think of it? What would he think of the author of it?

He watched very closely to see how people reacted when accused of being a contributor. He was always trying to improve his mastery of the delicate art of lying and the spectacle of people telling the truth under pressure repaid close study.

He noticed that people said things like:

'Yeah, it was me actually.'

'Piss off, Aitcheson! Everyone knows it was you.'

'Oh God! How did you find out? Do you think Headman knows?'

Adrian memorised all the replies and reproduced them as faithfully as he could.

And then the authorities had struck back.

Adrian's Housemaster, Tickford, rose to his feet after lunch that same day, as did the other eleven Housemasters in the other eleven Houses.

'All copies of this magazine will be collected from studies by the prefects before Games this afternoon and destroyed. Anyone found in possession of a copy after three o'clock will be severely punished.'

Adrian had never seen Tickford look so furious. He wondered if he could possibly have guessed that Bollocks! had originated in his House.

He and Tom had handed their two copies in cheerfully.

'There you go, Hauptmann Bennett-Jones,' said Adrian, 'we have also an edition of The Trial, by the notorious Jew, Kafka. Berlin would appreciate it, I am thinking, if this too was added to the bonfire. Also the works of that decadent lesbian Bolshevik, Jane Austen.'

'You'd better watch it, Healey. You're on the list. If you had anything to do with this piece of shit then you are in trouble.'

'Thank you, Sargent. You needn't take up any more of our valuable time. I'm sure you have many calls of a similar nature to make in the neighbourhood.'

But for all the sensational impact of the magazine, Adrian felt somehow a sense of anti-climax. His article would never make a shred of difference to anything. He hadn't exactly expected open warfare in the form-rooms, but it was depressing to realise that if he and Bullock and the others were exposed tomorrow they would be expelled, talked about for a while and then completely forgotten. Boys were cowardly and conventional. That's why the system worked, he supposed.

He sensed too that if he came across the article in later life, as a twenty-year-old, he would shudder with embarrassment at the pretension of it. But why should his future self sneer at what he was now? It was terrible to know that time would lead him to betray everything he now believed in.

What I am now is right, he told himself. I will never see things as clearly again, I will never understand everything as fully as I do at this minute.

The world would never change if people got sucked into it.

He tried to explain his feelings to Tom, but Tom was not in communicative mood.

'Seems to me there's only one way to change the world,' said Tom.

'And what's that?' asked Adrian.

'Change yourself.'

'Oh, that's bollocks!'

'And Bollocks! tells the truth.'

He went to the library and read up his symptoms in more detail. Cyril Connolly, Robin Maugham, T.C. Worsley, Robert Graves, Simon Raven: they had all had their Cartwrights. And the novels! Dozens of them. Lord Dismiss Us, The Loom of Youth, The Fourth of June, Sandel, Les Amities Particulieres, The Hill. . .

He was one of a long line of mimsy and embittered middle-class sensitives who disguised their feeble and decadent lust as something spiritual and Socratic.

And why not? If it meant he had to end his days on some Mediterranean island writing lyric prose for Faber and Faber and literary criticism for the New Statesman, running through successions of houseboys and 'secretaries', getting sloshed on Fernet Branca and having to pay off the Chief of Police every six months, then so be it. Better than driving to the office in the rain.

In a temper, he took out a large Bible, opened it at random and wrote 'Irony' down the margin in red biro. In the fly-leaf he scribbled anagrams of his name. Air and an arid nadir, a drain, a radian.

He decided to go and see Gladys. She would understand.

On his way he was ambushed from behind a gravestone by Rundell.

'Ha, ha! It's Woody Nightshade!'

'You took the words right out of my mouth, Tarty. Only you would know about something as disgusting as the Biscuit Game.'

'Takes one to know one.'

Adriam mimed taking out a notebook.

'"Takes one to know one," I must write that down. It might come in useful if I ever enter a competition to come up with the Most Witless Remark in the English Language.'

'Well I beg yours.'

'You can't have it.'

Rundell beckoned with a curled finger. 'New wheeze,' he said. 'Come here.'

Adrian approached cautiously.

'What foul thing is this?'

'No, I'm serious. Come here.'

He pointed to his trouser pocket. 'Put your hand in there.'

'Well frankly . . . even from you, Tarty, that's a bit . . .'

Rundell stamped his foot.

'This is serious! I've had a brilliant idea. Feel in there.'

Adrian hesitated.

'Go on!

Adrian dipped his hand in the pocket.

Rundell giggled.

'You see! I've cut the pockets out. And no undies. Isn't that brilliant?'

'You tarty great tart . . .'

'Keep going now you've started, for God's sake.'

*

Adrian reached Gladys and sat down with a thump. Down below, Rundell blew an extravagant kiss and skipped off to replenish his strength before trying the game on someone else.

Why can't I be satisfied with Tarty? Adrain asked himself, wiping his fingers on a handkerchief. He's sexy. He's fun. I can do things with him I wouldn't dream of doing with Cartwright. Oh hell, here comes someone else.

'Friend or foe?'

Pigs Trotter lumbered into view.

'Friend!' he panted.

'La! You are quite done up, my lord. Come and sit this one out with me.'

Trotter sat down while Adrian fanned himself with a dock-leaf.

'I always think the cotillion too fatiguing for the summer months. Persons of consequence should avoid it. When I have danced a cotillion, I know for a fact that I look plain beyond example. The minuet is, I believe, the only dance for gentlemen of rank and tone. You agree with me there, my lord, I make no doubt? I think it was Horry Walpole who remarked, "In this life one should try everything once except incest and country dancing." It is an excellent rule, as I remarked to my mother in bed last night. Perhaps you will do me the honour of accompanying me to the card room later? A game of Deep Bassett is promised and I mean to take my lord Darrow for five hundred guineas.'

'Healey,' said Trotter. 'I'm not saying you did and I'm not saying you didn't, I don't really care. But Woody Nightshade . . .'

'Woody Nightshade,' said Adrian. 'Solatium dulcamara, the common wayside bitter-sweet:

They seek him here, they seek him there,



Those masters seek him everywhere.



Isn't he nimble, isn't he neat,



That demmed elusive bitter-sweet.



'A poor thing, but mine own.'

'You've read his article, I suppose?' said Pigs Trotter.

'I may have glanced through it a few times in an idle hour,' said Adrian. 'Why do you ask?'

'Well ... '

There was a catch in Trotter's throat. Adrian looked at him in alarm. Tears were starting up in his piggy eyes.

Oh hell. Other people's tears were more than Adrian could cope with. Did you put an arm round them? Did you pretend not to notice? He tried the friendly, cajoling approach.

'Hey, hey, hey! What's the matter?'

'I'm sorry, Healey. I'm really sorry b-but . . .'

'You can tell me. What is it?'

Trotter shook his head miserably and sniffed.

'Here look,' said Adrian, 'there's a handkerchief. Oh . . . no, second thoughts this one's not so clean. But I have got a cigarette. Blow your nose on that.'

'No thanks, Healey.'

'I'll have it then.'

He eyed Trotter nervously. It was cheating to let your emotions out like this. And what was a lump like Pigs doing with emotions anyway? He had found a handkerchief of his own and was blowing his nose with a horrible mucous squelch. Adrian lit his cigarette and tried to sound casual.

'So what's troubling you, Trot? Is it something in the article?'

'It's nothing. It's just that bit where he starts talking about . , .'

Trotter drew a copy of Bollocks! from his pocket. It was already folded open on the second page of Adrian's article.

Adrian looked at him in surprise.

'I wouldn't get caught with this if I were you.'

'It's all right, I'm going to throw it away. I've copied it all out by hand anyway.'

Trotter dabbed a finger down on a paragraph.

'There,' he said, 'read that bit.'

'"And they call it puppy-love,'" Adrian read, '"well I'll guess they'll never know how the young heart really feels." The words of Donny Osmond, philosopher and wit, strike home as ever. How can they punish us and grind us down when we are capable of feelings strong enough to burst the world open? Either they know what we go through when we are in love, in which case their callousness in not warning us and helping us through it is inexcusable, or they have never felt what we feel and we have every right to call them dead. Love shrinks your stomach. It pickles your guts. But what does it do to your mind? It tosses the sandbags overboard so the balloon can soar. Suddenly, you're above the ordinary . . .'

Adrian looked across at Pigs Trotter who was rocking forwards and tightly gripping his handkerchief as if it were the safety-bar of a roller-coaster.

'It's a misquotation from The Lost Weekend that bit, I think,' said Adrian. 'Ray Milland talking about alcohol. So. You . . . er . . . you're in love then?'

Trotter nodded.

'Um . . . anyone . . . anyone I'd know? You don't have to say if you don't want to.' Adrian was maddened by the huskiness in his throat.

Trotter nodded again.

'It. . . must be pretty tough.'

'I don't mind telling you who it is,' said Trotter.

I'll kill him if it's Cartwright, Adrian thought to himself. I'll kill the fat bastard.

'Who is it then?' he asked, as lightly as he could.

Trotter stared at him.

'You of course,' he said and burst into tears.

They walked slowly back towards the House. Adrian wanted desperately to run away and leave Pigs Trotter to welter in the salt bath of his fatuous misery, but he couldn't.

He didn't know how to react. He didn't know the form. He supposed that he owed Trotter something. The object of love should feel honoured or flattered, responsible in some way. Instead he felt insulted, degraded and revolted. More than that, he felt put upon.

Trotter?

Pigs can fly. This one could, anyway.

It isn't the same, he kept saying to himself. It isn't the same as me and Cartwright. It can't be. Jesus, if I were to declare my love to Cartwright and he felt a tenth as pissed off as I do now ...

'It's all right, you know,' said Pigs Trotter, 'I know you don't feel the same way about me.'

Feel the same way about me? Christ.

'Well,' said Adrian, 'the thing is, you know, I mean it's a phase, isn't it?'

How could he say that? How could he say that?

'It doesn't make it any better though,' said Trotter.

'Right,' said Adrian.

'Don't worry. I won't bother you. I won't tag onto you and Tom any more. I'm sure it'll be all right.'

Well there you are. If he could be so sure that it would be 'all right' then how could it be love? Adrian knew that it would never be 'all right' with him and Cartwright.

Trotter's wasn't the Real Thing, it was just Pepsi.

They were nearing the House. Pigs Trotter dried his eyes on the sleeve of his blazer.

'I'm very sorry,' said Adrian, 'I wish . . .'

'That's okay, Healey,' said Trotter. 'But I ought to tell you that I have read The Scarlet Pimpernel, you know.'

'What do you mean?'

'Well, in the book, everyone wanted to know who the Scarlet Pimpernel was and so Percy Blakeney made up that rhyme: the one you just did a version of: "They seek him here, they seek him there, Those Frenchies seek him everywhere . . .'"

'Yes?' What on earth was he on about?

'The thing is,' said Trotter, 'that it was Percy Blakeney himself who was the Scarlet Pimpernel all the time, wasn't it? The one who made up the rhyme. That's all.'

IV

Adrian managed to get into Chapel early next morning, so that he could sit behind Cartwright and ponder the beauty of the back of his head, the set of his shoulders and the perfection of his buttocks as they tightened when he leant forward to pray.

It was a strange thing about beauty, the way that it trans- formed everything in and around a person. Cartwright's blazer was outstandingly the most beautiful blazer in Chapel, but it came from Gorringe's like everyone else's. The backs of his ears, peeping through the soft golden tangle of his hair, were skin and capillary and fleshy tissue like any ears, but nobody else's ears set fire to Adrian's blood and flooded his stomach with hot lead.

The hymn was 'Jerusalem the Golden'. Adrian as usual fitted his own words.

'O Cartwright you are golden, With milk and honey blest. Beneath thy contemplation Sink heart and voice opprest. I know well, O I know well, What lovely joys are there, What radiancy of glory, What light beyond compare.'

Tom, next to him, heard and gave a nudge. Adrian obediently returned to the text, but lapsed again into his own version for the final verse.

'O sweet and blessed Cartwright, Shall I ever see thy face? O sweet and blessed Cartwright, Shall I ever win thy grace? Exult O golden Cartwright! The Lord shall play my part: Mine only, mine for ever, Thou shalt be, arid thou art.'

Six hundred hymn-books were shelved and six hundred bodies rustled down onto their seats. At the east end, Headman's heels rang out on the stone floor as he stepped forward for Notices, hitching up the shoulder of his gown.

'Boys have been seen using a short cut from the Upper to Alperton Road. You are cordially reminded that this path goes through Brandiston Field, which is private property and out of bounds. The sermon on Sunday will be given by Rex Anderson, Suffragan Bishop of Kampala. The Bateman Medal for Greek Prose has been won by W.E.St. J. Hooper, Rosengard's House. That is all.'

He turned as if to go, then checked himself and turned back.

'Oh, there is one more thing. It has come to my notice that a more than usually juvenile magazine of some description has been circulating about the school. Until the authors of this nonsense have come forward there will be no exeats, no club activities and all boys will be confined to their Houses in free time. Nothing else.'

'It's a fucking outrage,' said Adrian as they streamed out of the Chapel into the sunshine. 'And so pathetic, so completely pathetic. "A juvenile magazine of some description!" As if he hasn't read it a hundred times and trembled with fury as he read it!'

'He just wants to make it sound as if it isn't such a big deal,' said Tom.

'Does he really think we're going to fall for that? He's scared, he's bloody scared.'

Hey don-Bay ley came up.

'Gated for the rest of term! The bastard!'

'It's just a feeble attempt to try and get the school to turn against the magazine and do his detective work for him,' said Bullock. 'It won't work. Whoever's responsible is too clever.'

Adrian was once more at a loose end that afternoon. It was a Corps day so there was no cricket and he didn't dare climb up to Gladys Winkworth in case he bumped into Trotter again. Officially he should be visiting his old lady and doing odd jobs for her, but she had died of hypothermia the previous term and he hadn't been supplied with a replacement yet. He had just decided to go down to the School Gramophone Library and practise conducting to records, a favourite legal pastime, when he remembered he had a standing invitation to tea from Biffen the French master.

Biffen lived in rather a grand house in its own grounds on the edge of town.

'Hello, sir,' said Adrian. 'It's a Friday, so I thought . . .'

'Healey! How splendid. Come in, come in.'

'I've brought some lemon curd, sir.'

There were about six boys already in the sitting room, talking to Biffen's wife, Lady Helen. Biffen had married her at Cambridge and then taken her back to his old school when he joined as a junior master. They had been here ever since, objects of great pity to the school: an Earl's daughter tied to a no-hope, slow-lane pedagogue.

'I know you!' boomed Lady Helen from the sofa. 'You are Healey from Tickford's House. You were Mosca in the School Play.'

'Healey is in my Lower Sixth French set,' said Biffen.

'And he mobs you appallingly, Humphrey dear. I know.'

'Er, I've brought some lemon curd,' said Adrian.

'How kind. Now, who do you know here?'

Adrian looked round the room.

'Um . . .'

'You'll certainly know Hugo. He's in your House. Go and sit next to him, and get him to stop spoiling my dog.'

Adrian hadn't noticed Cartwright sitting at a window seat, apart from the main group, tossing bits of cake at a spaniel.

'Hi,' he said, sitting down next to him.

'Hi,' said Cartwright.

'Did you pass your exam then?'

'Sorry?'

'Your Grade Three piano. You remember. Last term.'

'Oh, that. Yes thanks.'

'Great.'

More immortal dialogue from the Noel Coward of the seventies.

'So,' said Adrian, 'do you come here ... er ... is this something you've been to many times?'

'Most Fridays,' said Cartwright. 'I've never seen you here before.'

'No, well. . . I've not been invited before.'

'Right.'

'So . . . er . . . what happens exactly?'

'Well, you know, it's just a tea-party, really.'

And so it had proved. Biffen had instigated a book game in which everyone had to own up to books they'd never read. Biffen and Lady Helen called out titles of classic novels and plays and if you hadn't read them you had to put your hand up. Pride and Prejudice, David Copperfield, Animal Farm, Madame Bovary, 1984., Lucky Jim, Sons and Lovers, Othello, Oliver Twist, Decline and Fall, Howards End, Hamlet, Anna Karenina, Tess of the D'Urbervilles, the list of unread books that they managed to compile had made them all giggle. They had agreed that by the end of term the list would have to be much more obscure. The only two books that had been read by everyone present were Lord of the Flies and Catch 22 which, Biffen remarked, said much about English teaching at prep schools. It was all a transparent, and to Adrian rather wet, device to get everyone to read more, but it worked.

Adrian, despite the gentility of it all, had rather enjoyed himself and was fired with an enthusiasm for outreading everyone on the Russians, who always sounded the most impressive and impenetrable.

'I mean,' he said to Cartwright as they walked back to Tickford's, 'this place can really get you down. It's not a bad idea to have a sanctuary like that to go to, is it?'

'He's going to be my tutor next year when I'm in the Sixth Form,' said Cartwright. 'I want to go to Cambridge and he's the best at getting you through Oxbridge Entrance apparently.'

'Really? I want to go to Cambridge too!' said Adrian. 'Which college?'

'Trinity, I think.'

'God, me too! My father was there!'

Adrian's father in fact had been to Oxford.

'But Biffo thinks I should apply to St Matthew's. He has a friend there he was in the war with, a Professor Trefusis, supposed to be very good. Anyway, we'd better get a move on. Don't forget we're gated. It's nearly five already.'

'Oh shit,' said Adrian, as they broke into a run.

'Did you read the magazine, then?' he asked as they jogged up the hill to Tickford's.

'Yes,' said Cartwright.

And that was that.

'It was practically a conversation, Tom!'

'Great,' said Tom. 'Thing is . . .'

'It's all settled. He'll join me at Cambridge in my second year. After we've graduated we'll fly to Los Angeles or Amsterdam to get married - you can there, you know. Then we'll set up house in the country. I'll write poetry, Hugo will play the piano and look beautiful. We'll have two cats called Spasm and Clitoris. And a spaniel. Hugo likes spaniels. A spaniel called Biffen.'

Tom was unimpressed.

'Sargent was in here ten minutes ago,' he said.

'Oh pissly piss. What was he after?'

Tickford wants to see you in his study straight away.'

'What for?'

'Dunno.'

'It can't be . . . does he want to see you as well? Or Sammy or Bollocks?'

Tom shook his head.

'He's got nothing on me,' said Adrian. 'He can't have.'

'Stout denial,' said Tom. 'It works every time.'

'Exactly. Brazen it out.'

'But I tell you,' warned Tom, 'there's definitely something up. Sargent looked scared.'

'Rubbish,' said Adrian, 'he hasn't the imagination.'

'Shit-scared,' said Tom.

The Housemaster's study was through the Hall. Adrian was surprised to see all the Prefects standing about in a cluster near the door that connected the boys' side of the House to Mr and Mrs Tickford's living quarters. They stared at him as he went through. They didn't jeer or look hostile. They looked . . . they looked shit-scared.

Adrian knocked on Tickford's door.

'Come in!'

Adrian swallowed nervously and entered.

Tickford was sitting behind his desk, fiddling with a letter-opener.

Like a psychopath toying with a dagger, thought Adrian.

The window was at Tickford's back, darkening his face too much for Adrian to be able to read his expression.

'Adrian, thank you for coming to see me,' he said. 'Sit down, please sit down.'

'Thank you, sir.'

'Oh dear ... oh dear.'

'Sir?'

'I don't suppose you have any idea why I have sent for you?'

Adrian shook his head, a picture of round-eyed innocence.

'No, I should imagine not. No. I hope word has not got out.'

Tickford took off his glasses and breathed anxiously on the lenses.

'I have to ask you now, Adrian ... oh dear . . . it's all very . . .'

He replaced the glasses and stood up. Adrian could see his face clearly now, but still he couldn't read it.

'Yes, sir?'

'I'm going to have to ask you about your relationship with Paul Trotter.'

So that was it!

The moron had gone and blabbed to someone. The Chaplain probably. And vicious Dr Meddlar would have been only too keen to repeat it to Tickford.

'I don't know what you mean, sir.'

'It's a very simple question, Adrian. It really is. I'm asking you about your relationship with Paul Trotter.'

'Well, I haven't really . . . really got one, sir. I mean, we're sort of friends. He hangs around with me and Thompson sometimes. But I don't know him very well.'

'And that's it?'

'Well yes, sir.'

'It is terribly important that you tell me the truth. Terribly important.'

A boy can always tell when a master is lying, Adrian thought to himself. And Tickford isn't lying. It is very important.

'Well, there is one thing, sir.'

'Yes?'

'I really don't know that I should repeat this to you, sir. I mean Trotter did tell me something in confidence . . .'

Tickford leant forward and took Adrian's hand by the wrist.

'I promise you this, Adrian. Whatever Trotter may have said to you, you must now tell me. Do you understand? You must!'

'It's a bit embarrassing, sir ... couldn't you ask him yourself?'

'No, no. I want to hear from you.'

Adrian swallowed.

'Well sir, I bumped into Trotter yesterday afternoon and he suddenly ... he suddenly started crying and so I asked him what the matter was and he said he was very unhappy because he was . . . well he had a sort of . . .'

God this was hard.

'. . . he was . . . well he said he was in love with someone ... he, you know, had a pash on them.'

'I see. Yes, of course. Yes I see. He thought he was in love with someone. Another boy, I suppose?'

'That's what he said, sir.'

'Trotter was found in a barn in Brandiston Field this afternoon,' he said, pushing a piece of paper across the desk. 'This note was in his pocket.'

Adrian stared.

'Sir?'

Tickford nodded sadly.

'The stupid boy,' he said. 'The stupid boy hanged himself.'

Adrian looked at the note.

'I'm very sorry but I couldn't bear it any more,' it read. 'Healey knows why.'

'His mother and father are on their way down from Harro-gate,' said Tickford. 'What am I going to say?'

Adrian looked at him in panic.

'Why, sir? Why would he kill himself?'

'Tell me the name of the boy he was ... he had this thing for, Adrian.'

'Well, sir . . .'

'I must know.'

'It was Cartwright, sir. Hugo Cartwright.'





Two Savile Row suits, a Tommy Nutter and a Bennett, Tovey and Steele, faced each other over a table at Wiltons.

'Good to see the Native back again,' said the Bennett, Tovey and Steele. 7 was beginning to think it extinct.'

'Now you say that,' said the Tommy Nutter suit, 'but I've got rather a soft spot for the Pacific chaps myself. They're sort of wetter somehow, don't you think? Fleshlier if there is such a word.'

The Bennet, Tovey and Steele did not agree. He considered it typical of the Tommy Nutter to have a loud taste in oysters.

'This Montrachet's a bit warm, isn't it?'

The Bennett, Tovey and Steele sighed. He had been brought up from his nanny's knee to believe that white Burgundies should not be overchilled. They knew him at Wiltons and took great care to present his wines just so. The Tommy Nutter would resent a lecture, however. Men of his stamp were absurdly sensitive.

'Still,' said the other. 'Who's complaining? Now then. Let's talk Mendax. GDS has had no joy, I'm sorry to say, with the Odysseus material. No joy at all.'

'No decrypt whatsoever?'

'Oh, they opened it up all right. It was an old twist-cypher. Prewar. Absolute antique.'

'That figures,' grunted the Bennett, Tovey and Steele. 'And what was inside?'

'Names, addresses and telephone numbers. Load of harmless Osties.Lifted straight from the bloody Salzburg directory, would you believe?'

'The old bastard.'

'So the thing is,' the Tommy Nutter twisted the stem of his wineglass coyly, 'did this Odysseus of yours bring the material out or did he leave it behind?'

'He's had nothing in the mail. We know that.'

Your friend on the inside still paying his way?'

'Oh yes.'

'Good, because he's a greedy son of a bitch.'

The Bennett, Tovey and Steele suit ignored this. It wasn't as if the Tommy Nutter suit was paying for Telemachus. He thought he was, of course, and would probably never notice that it came directly out of the Bennett, Tovey and Steele's pocket, never to be reclaimedfrom the fund. It was a purely private business, but Cabinet liaison had to believe there was honey in it for them. It would not do for them to find out that the Service was being used entirely for the Bennett, Tovey and Steele's private ends.

'I think the Mendax material is still over there,' he said, 'without the walls of Ilium.'

'In Salzburg, you mean?' asked the Tommy Nutter, whose grip on codenames was weak at the best of times.

'That's right. In Salzburg.'

'This is all very much your own pigeon, you know. You are the only one who believes in Mendax. I am reminded of the operation you ran in seventy-six, also against Odysseus. What did that game come to?'

The Bennett, Tovey and Steele shot the Tommy Nutter a suspicious glare.

'What do you mean game?' he said. 'Why do you say game*"

'Keep your hair on, old man. I just meant that you seem to have a bit of a maggot in your head on the subject of Trefusis. Some of us are wondering why. That's all.'

'You'll find out yet. Listen. The point is this. I never said I did believe in Mendax. But if it doesn't exist why should the Trojans and Odysseus want us to believe that it does? That's worth pursuing surely?'

'Humph,' said the Tommy Nutter. 'It has at least been a cheap operation so far, that I will grant you. But we haven't a shred of proof that Szabo - what's he called again?'

'Helen.'

'We haven't a shred of evidence to suggest that Helen is anything other than a loyal servant of his state. The Trojans have just given him a medal for God's sake.'

'All the more reason to suspect Odysseus.'

'Why "Helen " by the way? Odd codename for a man.'

The Bennett, Tovey and Steele suit was not going to give the Tommy Nutter a free lesson in Homeric mythology. Where did the man go to school? The tie was no indication. Beaconsfield Conservatives or something equally foul, probably. Hadley Wood Golf Club. Carshalton Rotarians. Yuk.

'It seemed to make sense at the time,' he said.

'Oh ah,' the Tommy Nutter pressed a crumb into the table cloth. 'So tell me about these grandchildren.'

'Stefan is a chess-player. He's coming over here to play in a couple of months. They'll keep him on a long leash I shouldn't wonder.'

'And you want me to allocate resourcing?'

'I'd quite like some money made available, if that's what you mean. Grade Two surveillance should, do it.'

'I have to interface, as they say, with the Treasury tomorrow. Cabinet next week. Oh, look, you're not going to smoke are you?'

Christ! thought the Bennett, Tovey and Steele. Roll on the next Labour government.





Four

I

Tim Anderson considered the question with great care.

'I don't believe that the comparison with Oliver Twist, seductive and engaging as I would be the last to deny it being, is as valid as a first glance might allow.'

'But surely, Dr Anderson, the similarities are very clear. What we have here is a secret workhouse birth, we have a gang of boys set to work by the character Polterneck, we have the character of Peter Flowerbuck, who traces his own family connection with the Cotton twins, not unlike Mr Brownlow's quest in Oliver Twist, we have Flinter, who like Nancy is an agent of revenge. The parallels are surely most striking?'

Gary poured some more Meursault for Jenny and Adrian, never at any time taking his eyes off the screen.

'I am not going to consider failing to grant you the presence of narrative echoes,' Tim Anderson replied, 'but I would certainly find myself presented with personal difficulties if asked to deny that this is the mature Dickens of Little Dorrit and Bleak House. I'm sensing a fuller picture of a connected world here than we are allowed in Twist. I'm sensing a deeper anger, I find myself responding to a more complete symphonic vision. The chapter which describes the flood, the scene depicting the bursting of the Thames's banks and the sweeping away of the Den is a more proleptic and organic event than the reader has been confronted with in earlier novels. I would be laying myself open to a charge of being mistaken if I attempted to resist the argument that the character of Flinter is a development of both Nancy and the Artful Dodger which we can't be afraid to recognise takes us into a more terrified Dickens, a more, if you like, Kafkaesque Dickens.'

The interviewer nodded.

'I understand that the University has already sold the film and television rights of Peter Flowerbuck?'

'That is not substantially incorrect.'

'Are you worried that to do this before the manuscript has been officially authenticated might lay you open to future embarrassment, should it prove to be a fake?'

'As you know, we have taken on a number of new research fellows at St Matthew's who are working extensively on the text to determine its authenticity-level. They will be running linguistic particles and image-clusters through a computer program which is as reliable as any chemical test.'

'Authorial fingerprinting?'

'Authorial is the term often used, fingerprinting, that is far from wrong.'

'And how confident are you that this is genuine Dickens?'

'Let me turn that question round and say that I am not confident that it isn't Dickens.'

'Let me turn that answer round and say "bullshit",' said Adrian.

'Hush!' said Jenny.

'Well, I mean. Symphonic visions.'

'I don't think it insignificant,' Anderson continued, 'that at a time when English departments at my university and hundreds of others are being threatened with cuts, a discovery of pure scholarship like this should attract such attention and validate so completely what has quite properly been perceived as the beleaguered discipline of English studies.'

'It's a very lucrative discovery, certainly. How in fact was it made?'

'I was alerted to the existence of the text by a student of mine from Newnham College. She had been participating in my seminars on Derrida and Sexual Difference and had been pursuing a number of independent lines of enquiry into the Victorian Deviant Ethic. She found the papers in the St Matthew's College Library hidden amongst old copies of Corn-hill magazine..'

'Did she realise what she had stumbled across?'

'She was not unaware of its potential lack of insignificance.'

'I understand that a philologist from your own department, and indeed college, Donald Trefusis, has expressed doubts as to the genuineness of the find?'

'I believe that I think it of immense value to express doubts. It is because of the Professor's repeated queries that we have been granted the necessary funding to research the manuscript.'

'Dr Anderson, many people like myself, who have read Peter Flowerbuck have been struck by the candour and detail with which sexual activity and the nature of Victorian child-prostitution is described. Do you think Dickens ever intended to publish?'

'We are currently trawling all biographical source materials for some clue as to the answer to that highly legitimate question. Perhaps I can turn it round, however, and ask, "Would he not have destroyed the manuscript if he never wanted it read?" Yeah?'

'I see.'

'I cannot deny myself the right to believe that he left it to be found. We therefore owe it to him to publish now.'

'It is not of course a completed work. What you have is only a fragment.'

'There is truth in that remark.'

'Do you think there is a chance of discovering the rest of the manuscript?'

'If it exists we are not doubtful of locating the residue.'

'Dr Anderson, thank you very much indeed. The three currently extant chapters of Peter Flowerbuck, edited and annotated by Tim Anderson, will be available from the Cambridge University Press in October, priced fourteen pounds ninety-five. The BBC serialisation, currently in production, with an ending by Malcolm Bradbury, is due to reach our screens sometime in the spring of nineteen-eighty-one.'

Jenny got up and switched off the television.

'Well,' said Gary, 'that's set the apple-cart amongst the pigeons and no mistake. What do we do now?'

'Now,' said Adrian, 'we wait.' ,

II

Adrian put down the cane and loosened the cravat. Gary sat down on the step and mopped his brow with a most preposterous handkerchief of bright vermilion silk. Jenny addressed them from the fire-escape.

'I have very few notes to give,' she said. 'There's an old theatrical saying, "Bad dress, good performance"; I'm sorry to have to tell you that this was an excellent dress. The mechanics of the show are all there. The greatest imponderable is the time it will take for the audience to follow Adrian into this yard. That's something we'll discover tonight. It's all there: just pace and enjoy it. We're all just waiting for the final director now -the audience. If you don't mind standing here in the sun I'll come amongst you now with individual notes.'

Jenny had approached Tim Anderson for permission to mount a production of Peter Flowerbuck and his gratitude to her for the discovery of the manuscript had made it impossible for him to refuse.

'Jenny, can I ask at this stage how you imagine presenting on stage what is, ultimately, not a play?'

'Didn't you once say yourself, Dr Anderson, that all the theatrical energy in Victorian Britain went not into drama but into the novel?'

'That is something I did say, yes.'

'The RSC is apparently planning a dramatisation of Nicholas Nickleby, surely Peter Flowerbuck is even more suited to the theatre? If we use the ADC we can take the audience outside with Peter as he goes to the Den. The yard at the side of the theatre is pretty much a Victorian slum already.'

'I'm insanely excited.'

'Good.'

'Jenny, may I ask you, do you need any help with the preparation or finalisation of a play text?'

'Oh, I'm not writing it. Adrian Healey is.'

'Healey? I wasn't aware he'd been authorised to read the manuscript.'

'Oh, he's read it all right.'

She climbed down the fire-escape now and approached Adrian and Gary with a sheaf of notes.

'The Polterneck scenes are basically fine,' she told Gary. 'But for God's sake learn that scene twelve speech properly.'

'What happens in scene twelve?'

'It's where you buy Joe. Which reminds me, where's Hugo?'

'Here I am.'

'I want to rehearse the Russell Square scene with you and Adrian. It's still not right. Let's see . . . I've got some more notes for the others. If you go and run through it on stage now I'll send Bridget over and be with you in ten minutes.'

Hugo and Adrian walked into the theatre together.

'Nervous?'said Adrian.

'A bit. My mother's coming. I don't know what she'll think.'

'Your mother?'

'She's an actress.'

'Why did I never know that?'

'Why should you have done?'

'No reason, I suppose.'

It would have been a difficult scene even if Hugo hadn't been playing Joe. Adrian ran through it in his mind, like a Radio 3 announcer giving the synopsis of an opera.

Flowerbuck, he intoned to himself, has taken the boy Joe Cotton back to his house in Russell Square, convinced that he is his sister's son. Joe on arrival immediately tries to take off his clothes, unable to imagine that he would be expected to do anything else in a gentleman's house. Peter and Mrs Twimp, his housekeeper, calm him down and give him a bath. Mrs Twimp, played by Bridget Arden, injects into the scene her own brand of malapropistic comedy as they try to question Joe on the details of his early childhood. His memory is very uncertain. He recalls a garden, a large house and a fair-haired sister but very little else. At this stage, and indeed on this stage, Adrian Healey, playing Flowerbuck, finds his memory to be uncertain too and often starts to forget his lines.

After the bath Joe is taken to the dining room to eat. Or rather the dining room comes to them. It is that kind of production. Joe recognises in horror a portrait of Sir Christian Flowerbuck, Peter's uncle.

'That gentleman hurt me!' he cries.

It transpires that Sir Christian, Peter's benefactor and godfather, whose baronetcy and money Peter is in line to inherit, had been the first man to violate Joe.

The scene ends at night with Joe creeping from his room and slipping into Peter's bed. He knows no other form of companionship or love.

Peter awakes next morning, horrified to realise that he has lain with the boy who he is now more sure than ever is his nephew.

Adrian had had nothing to do with the casting of Hugo, at least as far as anyone knew. Jenny had bounced into his rooms one afternoon, full of excitement.

'I've just seen a perfect Joe Cotton! We don't need to get a real boy after all.'

'Who is this child?'

'He's not a child, he's a Trinity first year, but on stage he'll look fourteen or fifteen easily. And, Adrian, he's exactly as you . . . hum ... as Dickens describes Joe. Same hair, same blue eyes, everything. Even the same walk, though I don't know if from the same cause. He came to see me this morning, it was rather embarrassing, he thought I was expecting him. Bridget must have arranged it without telling me. His name's Hugo Cartwright.'

'Really?' said Adrian. 'Hugo Cartwright, eh?'

'Do you know him?'

'If it's the one I'm thinking of, we were in the same House at school.'

Gary opened his mouth to speak, but he met Adrian's eye and subsided.

'I dimly remember him,' said Adrian.

'Don't you think he's ideal casting for Joe?'

'Well in many ways I suppose he is, yes. Fairly ideal.'

If Hugo was unnerved by correspondences between a hundred-and-twenty-year-old Victorian manuscript and an incident from his own and Adrian's life he made no mention of the fact. But there was no doubt that his acting in the scene was awkward and formal.

'This is your home now, Joe. Mrs Twimp is to be your mother.'

'Yes, sir.'

'How should you like Mrs Twimp as a mother?'

'Does she want to join us, sir?'

'Join us, Joe? Join us in what?'

'In the bed, sir.'

'Bless me, Mr Flowerbuck, the lad is so manured to a life of shame, that's the fact of it, that he can't conceive no other!'

'There is no necessity for you to sleep with anyone but yourself and your Saviour, Joe. In peace and innocence.'

'No, Sir, no indeed! Mr Polterneck and Mrs Polterneck and Uncle Polterneck must have their boy-money. I am their gold sovereign, Sir.'

'Keep your clothes on, Joe, I beg of you!'

'Lord love the poor child, Mr Flowerbuck. Look at the condition of him! He should be washed and given fresh arraignments.'

'You're right, Mrs Twimp. Bring a bath and a robe.'

'I shall return percipiently.'

Jenny called across from the stalls.

'What do you think your feelings towards Joe are here?'

Adrian shaded his eyes across the lights.

'Well revulsion, I'd've thought. Horror, pity, indignation . . .you know. All that.'

'Good, yes. But what about desire?'

'Um... '

'You see, I think it's implicit that Peter is sexually attracted to Joe from the first.'

'Well I really don't. . .'

'I feel Dickens makes it very clear.'

'But he's his nephew! I don't think Dickens had any such thought in Dickenss head, do you?'

'I don't think we can be so sure.'

'Oh can't we?'

'Look at Joe now. He's standing in front of you, half naked. I think we should sense a sense of ... we should sense a sense of ... of... some kind of latent, repressed desire.'

'Right-ho. One sense of latent, repressed desire coming up. Do you want a side-order of self-disgust too, or hold on that?'

'Adrian, we go up in three hours, please don't start fucking about.'

'Okay. Fine.'

'Now, Hugo, what about you?'

'Well... '

'What's your attitude to Adrian, do you think?'

'Well he's just another man, isn't he?'

'I don't know how to love him,' sang Adrian. 'What to do, how to move him. He's a man, he's just a man and I've had so many men before, in very many ways. He's just one more.'

'I think Adrian's right there,' said Jenny. 'Despite being a quarter-tone flat. Imagine all the peculiar things you've had to do for your customers. Being bathed and clothed probably doesn't seem that new or different. You've been trained to please: your complaisance is the complaisance of a whore, your smile is the smile of a whore. I think you can afford a touch more assuredness. At the moment you're rather stiff.'

'He's only flesh and blood,' said Adrian. 'Look at who he's standing next to.'

'Adrian, please!'

'Sorry, Miss.'

Mrs Twimp entered with the breakfast tray.

—Sir, the lad can't be found . . . ooh!'

She started in surprise at the sight of Joe's head nestling on the sleeping Flowerbuck's bare chest.

—Sir! Sir!

—Oh . . . good morning, Mrs Twimp...

—Bless me! I never saw such licence! Mr Flowerbuck, Sir, I cannot credit the account of my eyes. That you should stand exposed as an amuser of children, nought but a correcter of youth, a pedestal! A vile producer, a libertarian! That I should gaze upon such naked immortality, such disillusion.

—Calm yourself, Mrs Twimp. The child crept in at night when I was asleep. I had not the first idea that he was with me until just now.

—Sir! I beg your pardon . . . but the sight of him. I could only jump to one confusion.

—Leave us, Mrs Twimp.

—Shall you try to arouse him, sir? I think he should be aroused directly.

Adrian could feel Hugo's body tense at the laugh from the audience that greeted this line.

—I will wake him and send him down to you, Mrs Twimp.

—I shall draw some water for his absolutions.

She exited to a warm round of applause.

Adrian sat up and stared in front of him.

—Oh Lord! What have I done? What in God's name have I done?

—Good morning, sir.

—Ah Joe, Joe! Why did you come to me last night?

—You are my saviour, sir. Mrs Twimp bade me remember it most carefully. And you told me I should sleep only with my saviour.

—Child, I meant . . .

—Did I do wrong, sir? Did I not please you?

—I dreamt... I know not what I dreamt. Say I was asleep, Joe. Say I slept all night.

—You were very gentle to me, sir.

—No! No! No!

In the blackout and in the thunder of applause that marked the end of the act, they lay there while the bed was trundled into the wings where Jenny stood jumping up and down with excitement.

'Wonderful!' she said. 'Listen to that! The Grauniad is out there and the Financial Times.,

'The Financial Times?' said Adrian. 'Is Tim Anderson thinking of starting a Flower buck limited company?

'Their drama critic'

'I didn't know they had one. Who the hell reads drama criticism in the Financial Times?'

'Everyone will if it's a good notice, because I'll have it blown up and put outside the theatre.'

'How long's the interval?' asked Hugo.

No one at the party was going to deny that it had been the finest production in the history of Cambridge drama, that Hugo and Gary in particular were bound for West End glory in weeks, that Adrian had done a fine job in translating Dickens to the stage and that he must write a new play for Jenny to direct the moment she joined the National, which appointment must be only days away.

'My dear Healey!' a hand was placed on Adrian's shoulder. He turned to see the smiling face of Donald Trefusis.

'Hello, Professor. Did you enjoy it?'

'Triumphant, Adrian. Absolutely triumphant. A most creditable piece of adaptation.'

'Will it do as my piece of original work?'

Trefusis looked puzzled.

'You know, the task you set me earlier this term?'

'Adapting someone's novel? Will that do as your piece of original work? You must have misunderstood me.'

Adrian was slightly drunk and, although he had planned this moment a hundred times in his head, it was always in Trefusis's rooms and without 'Hit Me With Your Rhythm Stick' playing in the background.

'Well, Professor, no. That's not what I mean,' he cleared his throat., 'I mean will Peter Flowerbuck the novel count as my original piece of work?'

'Oh certainly, certainly. By all means. I thought for a moment that you were . . .'

Bridget Arden, the voluptuous actress who had played Mrs Twimp with such éclat, came up and kissed Adrian on the mouth. ' . -

'Julian's rolling a joint in the downstairs dressing-room, Adey. Come and join us.'

'Ha! Very good! Rolling a joint! That's a great one! Love it . . . er, she's just . . . you know,' explained Adrian, as they watched her falling downstairs.

'Of course she is, my dear fellow! No, I was saying. I thought for a moment you expected that I would take just the adapting of your novel as a satisfactory task. I accept the writing of it, gladly. A splendid conception. It exceeded my most optimistic expectations.'

'You mean you know?'

'Aside from the three hundred and forty-seven anachronisms that Dr Anderson and his team will uncover in time, I had the good fortune to be in your rooms one afternoon. How I could have mistaken D staircase for A, I have no idea. I am not usually so inattentive. But before I realised my error, I had stumbled across the manuscript.'

'You stumbled across a bundle of papers wrapped in a blanket hidden on top of a bookcase?'

'I am quite a stumbler when the mood is on me. I stumbled for Cambridge as an undergraduate.'

'I bet you did.'

'Absurdly remiss of me, I know. Not solely an affliction of the elderly however. I believe your friend Gary Collins once accidentally stumbled into my rooms in just the same way. In his case, I understand he even stumbled across a telephone before he noticed where he was. These confusions are not so rare as one might imagine.'

'Oh God. But if you've known all along, why haven't you . . .'

'Blown the whistle? I have my reasons and your manuscript serves them perfectly. The English department at St Matthew's has never had so many research fellows or been flooded with so many grants. The Dickens Society of Chicago alone . . . but that is of no interest to you. I am sincerely delighted. This is the second time you have failed to disappoint me. It's so hard to find a good crook these days. You're a treasure, Adrian, a real treasure. One thing I am unclear on, though. Why did you hit upon the happy idea of having the manuscript discovered in St Matthew's and not in the University Library?'

'Well, I wanted it to be college property. I assumed then that you would be the one to publicise it.'

'And I would be the one with egg on my face when the truth came out? I suspected as much. You are too splendid. I know we shall become friends.'

'No I didn't exactly mean . . .'

'You have done your college a great service. I will leave now, to allow space for carnival, riot, drugs and carnal frenzy to develop. Silenus and his leering wrinkles are not required when youth is sporting. Oh look, there is that man from Narborough, the one you routed on the cricket field the first time ever we met. Excellent performance, my dear Cartwright! I am not ashamed to say that I wept openly.'

Hugo nodded vaguely and came up to Adrian, flushed and swaying, a bottle in one hand, a cigarette in the other.

'Look where he comes,' said Adrian, 'the Allegory of Dissipation and Ruin.'

Hugo burped happily and gestured at Trefusis who was saying his farewells to Jenny.

'I know that old fart from somewhere,' he said.

'You are talking about the old fart that I love. That old fart is a genius. That old fart won a thousand pounds by backing Chartham Park against Narborough Hall. You must remember the cricket match.'

'Oh yes, that's right. You cheated.'

'Cheated?'

'Donald Trefusis. Philip Slattery's uncle. Friend of old Biffo Biffen's from school. I don't forget anything, me. Mnemosyne was, let us not forget it, the mother of the Muses.'

Adrian looked at him in surprise. 'Well, quite.'

'At least according to Hesiod. So what is the old fart that you love doing here?'

'He's the ADC treasurer.'

Jenny came up with Gary.

'For God's sake stop drinking, Hugo. You'll look forty tomorrow instead of fourteen if you carry on at this rate.'

'A man who has just exposed himself to four hundred people, including his mother, has every right to drink.'

'God yes, I forgot the famous Helen Lewis was in,' said Adrian. 'How did she like it?'

'She was highly complimentary about everyone except me.'

'She didn't like you?'Jenny asked.

'She just didn't mention me, that's all.'

Jenny consoled him with the thought that it was probably professional jealousy. Adrian beckoned to Gary, who was pogoing with a lighting technician.

'Trefusis knows all,' he said. 'The bugger burglarised our rooms. But it's all all right.'

'What does Trefusis know?' said Hugo, who had overheard.

'Nothing, nothing.'

'He's the old fart that Adrian loves,' Hugo confided to Jenny and the rest of the room. 'I used to be the old fart that he loves. Now it's Trefusisisisis.'

'That's right, Hugo, time for bye-byes.'

'Really?' said Jenny. 'I thought / was the old fart he loved.'

'Adrian loves everybody, didn't you know? He even loves Lucy.'

'And who the hell is Lucy?'

'Oh my goodness, is that the time? Jenny, if we're going to hit Newnham tonight we should . . .'

'Lucy is his dog. He loves Lucy.'

'That's right. I love Lucy. Starring Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz. Now I really think . . .'

4Do you know what he did once? In Harrogate. He pretended to . . .'

'Oh shit, he's about to throw,' said Gary.

Adrian caught the brunt of the vomit, which, in an unusual fit of humility, he rather thought he deserved.

III

'So let me see if I understood you, Dr Anderson.' Menzies removed his spectacles and pinched the bridge of his nose like a rep actor in a court-room drama. 'Not one word, not one syllable of this document is in fact the work of Charles Dickens?'

'It certainly looks as if the paper and writing materials are modern. The handwriting however . . .'

'Oh for goodness' sake, if the ink is twentieth-century how can the manuscript be in Dickens's own hand? Or are we now to authorise research grants that will establish the use of the retractable biro in Victorian Britain? Perhaps you even believe that Dickens is still alive?'

'I think I should remind the governing body,' said Clinton-Lacey, 'that the film is due to be premiered next week. Some kind of statement is going to have to be made.'

'The college will be a laughing-stock.'

'Yes indeed,' said Trefusis. 'Sketches on Not The Nine o'clock News, a cartoon by Marc. Calamitous.'

'Well it's your department, Donald,' said Menzies. 'Rather than sit back and enjoy this cataclysm, why don't you come up with a solution?'

Trefusis stubbed out his cigarette.

'Well now, that is precisely what I have taken the liberty of doing,' he said. 'With your permission I shall read a statement that the press might be offered without too much embarrassment.'

Everyone around the table murmured assent. Trefusis took a piece of paper from his satchel.

'"Using a linguistic analysis program pioneered by the English faculty in collaboration with the Department of Computing Science,'" he read, "'Dr Tim Anderson, Fellow of St Matthew's College and Lecturer in English at the University, has refined and perfected techniques which have allowed him to determine precisely which parts of the play The Two Noble Kinsmen were written by Shakespeare and which by Fletcher.'"

'Er ... I have?' asked Tim Anderson.

'Yes, Tim, you have.'

'What on earth has Shakespeare got to do with it?' cried Menzies. 'We are talking about . . .'

'"Comparing textual samples of known Shakespeare against the writings of the Earl of Oxford, Francis Bacon and Christopher Marlowe, he is also in a position to prove that all the plays of the Shakespearean canon are the work of one hand, William Shakespeare's, and that Oxford, Bacon and Marlowe are responsible for none of it. There are, however, some intriguing passages in three of the plays which would appear not to be by Shakespeare. Dr Anderson and his team are working on them now and should soon have positive results. An interesting byproduct of this important work is the discovery that the novel Peter Flowerbuck is not by Charles Dickens, but is almost certainly the work of a twentieth-century writer. There is evidence, however, that the story is based on an original Dickens plot. Dr Anderson's team is following up this suggestion with great energy." I think that should meet the case.'

'Ingenious, Donald,' said Clinton-Lacey. 'Quite ingenious.'

'You're too kind.'

'I don't see what's so ingenious about it. Why bring Shakespeare in?'

'He's diverting attention, Garth,' Clinton-Lacey explained. 'Bring out the name Shakespeare and it's even bigger copy than Dickens.'

'But all this guff about Dr Anderson working on bits of Shakespeare and the plot lines being original Dickens? What's that about?'

'Well you see,' said Trefusis. 'It shows that we are currently researching all this important material, that there may be something in Peter Flowerbuck after all.'

'But there isn't!'

'We know that, but the newspapers don't. In a couple of months' time the whole thing will be forgotten. If they do make enquiries about our progress we can say that Dr Anderson is still working on the problem. I'm sure Tim will be able to bemuse the press.'

'He will be the one to make the announcement then?'

'Certainly,' said Trefusis. 'I have nothing to do with the affair.'

'I'm unsure as to what the tension between the ethical boundaries and the margins of pragmatism might announce themselves to be in a situation which . . .' Anderson began.

'You see? Tim will do splendidly. His is the only major European language I still find myself utterly unable to comprehend. The press will be bored. It isn't quite enough of a hoax story to excite them and is too rigorous and scientific to have any human interest.'

'But all this means that we will have to keep funding the extra staff,' Menzies complained. 'For appearances' sake.'

'Yes,' said Trefusis dreamily, 'there is that drawback of course.'

'That's outrageous.'

'Oh I don't know. As long as they're kept busy lecturing, teaching undergraduates and authenticating documents that will be sent to us from all over the world - now that we are acknowledged as the leading university for authorial fingerprinting - I'm sure we'll find a use for them. They may even pay their way.'

IV

'You're lying,' said Gary. 'You've got to be lying.'

'I wish I were,' said Adrian. 'No, that's not true, I wouldn't have missed it for worlds.'

'You're telling me that you sold your arse down the Dilly?'

'Why not? Someone's got to. Anyway it wasn't my arse exactly.'

Gary paced up and down the room while Adrian watched him. He didn't know why he had told him. He supposed because he had been stung once too often by the accusation that he had no idea what the real world was like.

It had started when Adrian had mentioned that he was seriously considering marrying Jenny.

'Do you love her?'

'Look Gary. I'm twenty-two years old. I got here by the skin of my teeth, because I awoke from the bad dream of adolescence in the nick of time. Every morning for the next, God knows, fifty years, I'm going to have to get out of bed and participate in the day. I simply do not trust myself to be able to do that on my own. I'll need someone to get up for.'

'But do you love her?'

'I am magnificently prepared for the long littleness of life. There is diddley-squat for me to look forward to. Zilch, zero, zip-all, sweet lipperty-pipperty nothing. The only thought that will give me the energy to carry on is that someone has a life which would be diminished by my departure from it.'

'Yes, but do you love her?'

'You're beginning to sound like Olivier in The Marathon Man, "Is it safe? Is it safe?" "Sure it's safe. It's real safe." "Is it safe?" "No, it's not safe. It's incredibly unsafe." "Is it safe?" How the hell do I know?'

'You don't love her.'

'Oh piss off, Gary. I don't love anyone, anything, or anybody. Well, "anyone" and "anybody" are the same, but I can't think of a third "any". Which reminds me . . . that bloody Martini advert, it's bugged me for years. "Any time, any place, anywhere." What the fuck difference is there between any place and anywhere? Some advertising copy-writer was paid thousands for that piece of rubbish.'

'This is a change of subject on a cosmic scale. You don't love her, do you?'

'I just said. I don't love anyone, anything or any body, any time, any place, anywhere. Who does?'

'Jenny does.'

'Women are different, you know that.'

'I do as well.'

'Men are different too.'

'Gay men, you mean.'

'I cannot believe I am having this conversation. You think I'm like Emma, don't you? "Adrian Healey, handsome, clever and rich, with a comfortable home and happy disposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence; and had lived nearly twenty-three years in the world with very little to disturb or vex him.'"

'Distress or vex, I think you'll find. It's as good a description as any.'

'Really? Well, I may have missed some of Jane Austen's subtler hints, but I don't think Emma Woodhouse spent part of her seventeenth year as a harlot in Piccadilly. I haven't read it for a couple of years of course, and some of the obliquer references could have passed over my head. Miss Austen also seems to fight very shy of describing Emma's time in chokey on remand for possession of cocaine. Again I'm perfectly prepared to concede that she did and that I have simply failed to pick up the clues.'

'What the fuck are you going on about?'

And Adrian had told him something of his life between school and Cambridge.

Gary was still indignant. 'You plan to marry Jenny without telling her any of this?'

'Don't be so bourgeois, my dear. It doesn't suit you at all.'

Adrian was growing disillusioned with Gary. He had started on his History of Art, or History O Fart, as Adrian liked to call it, at the beginning of the year and ever since he had begun to evolve into something else. Bondage trousers had given way to second-hand tweed jackets with Hermes silk nourishing from the breast pockets. The hair returned to its natural dark, slicked back with KY jelly; knives and forks dangled no more from the lobes. The Damned and The Clash were less likely to blast across the court from the rooms now than Couperin and Bruckner.

'It only needs a moustache for you to look like Roy Strong,' Adrian had told him once, but Gary hadn't been moved. He wasn't going to be the world's little piece of pet rough any more and that was that. And now he was lecturing Adrian on the ethics of personal relations.

'Anyway, why should I tell her? What difference would it make?'

'Why should you marry her? What difference would it make?'

'Oh let's not go round in circles. I've tried to tell you. I've done all my living. There's nothing to look forward to. Do I go into advertising? Do I teach? Do I apply to the BBC? Do I write plays and become the voice of the Bland Young Man generation? Do I consider journalism? Do I go to an acting school? Do I have a shot at industry? The only justification for my existence is that I am loved. Whether or not I like it, I am responsible for Jenny and that is something to get up in the morning for.'

'So it's a life of sacrifice. You're afraid that if you don't marry her, she'll top herself? I hate to wound your vanity but people don't behave like that.'

'Oh don't they? Don't people kill themselves?'

Jenny entered without knocking.

'Hiya, bum-holes, I cleared your pigeon-holes on the way in. Exciting jiffy-bag for you, big boy. Could it be the clitoral exciter we ordered?'

'Morning toast more like,' said Gary, taking the package and passing it over.

Adrian opened it while Gary explained to Jenny the history of Toast By Post.

'You taught a boy two years ago and he still has this crush on you?'

'His faithful little heart overflows with love.'

'Nonsense,' said Adrian. 'It was never more than an elaborate joke. If anything the parcels mock me.'

'Do you think he wanks into them before he seals them up?'

'Gary!'Jenny was shocked.

'As in "I'm coming in a jiffy", you mean? No, I do not, though I grant you the toast is a bit soggy. What else have we? A little pot of apricot jam, a pat of butter, a note which says, "And Conradin made himself another piece of toast. . .'"

'That boy is weird.'

'Who's Conradin?'Jenny asked.

'Reach down my index, Watson, and look under "C". Dear me, what villainy is grouped under this letter alone! There's Callaghan, the politician to whose door we traced what you in your memoirs gave the somewhat fanciful title the "Winter of Discontent", Watson. Here's Callow, the second most dangerous actor in London, any one of whose grimaces may be fatal, Lewis Collins, Charlie Chester, Leslie Crowther of dread memory, Marti Caine, what a catalogue of infamy is here . . .but no Conradin. Peter Conrad, who invented opera, William Conrad, whose Cannon was a Quinn Martin Production, but no Conradin.'

'I think it's from a Saki short story,' said Gary. 'Sredni Vashtar, the polecat.'

'Oh yes, you're quite right. Or was he a ferret?'

'And what's the relevance to you?' asked Jenny.

'Well, there we have to peer into the dark, dripping mind of Hunt the Thimble. The chances are that it is simply a literary reference to toast, and he is fast running out of those. But there could be a Meaning.'

'Conradin was a boy who had a horrible, repressive aunt,' said Gary. 'So he prayed to Sredni Vashtar, his polecat . . .'

'Or ferret.'

'He prayed to his polecat or ferret and his prayers were answered. Sredni Vashtar killed the aunt.'

'And meanwhile Conradin calmly made himself another piece of toast.'

'I see,' said Jenny. 'The polecat is a kind of phallic symbol, do we think?'

'Honestly, dear,' said Gary, 'you're so obsessed, you'd think a penis was phallic.'

'Well Sredni Vashtar is a monster from the Id, at the very least,' said Adrian. 'The dark, hot-breathed stink of the animal that Conradin would one day release from its dark hiding-place to wreak its revenge on the chintz and teacups of his aunt's drawing-room life.'

'Do you think this boy is trying to tell you something?'

'Perhaps his thimble is a thimble no more, but a long, furry savage beast that wriggles and spits and mauls aunts. I'll write and ask him.'

He looked through the rest of his post. A cheque from his mother was always welcome, a cheque from Uncle David for five hundred pounds even more so. He slipped it quickly into his jacket pocket. Reminders that Billy Graham was in Cambridge and would preach in Great St Mary's were always monumentally unwelcome, as were invitations to hear Acis and Galatea played on original instruments.

'But not sung,' he suggested, looking through the rest of his mail, 'on original voices. I suppose in two hundred years' time they'll be giving Beatles concerts on ancient Marshall ... oh and a letter from old Biffo, bless him.'

Biffen was the only master from school with whom Adrian stayed in touch. The man was so fluffy and white and decent and had taken so much pleasure in the news of Adrian's scholarship to St Matthew's which had somehow filtered through to the school the year before, that it would have been a positive cruelty not to write to him from time to time to let him know how it was all going.

He glanced through the letter. Biffen was full of the news of the Dickens manuscript.

'Donald writes me that there may be some doubt about it. I do hope not.'

'I'd forgotten Biffo knew Trefusis,' said Adrian, laying the letter aside. 'Hello! What have we here?'

There was a crumpled handwritten note for him. 'Please come to tea at C5, Great Court, Trinity. Alone. Hugo.'

'How is Hugo?' asked Jenny. 'I haven't seen much of him since Flowerbuck.1

'I remember him being rather naff in Bridget's production of Sexual Perversity In Chicago] said Gary. 'He kept forgetting his lines and tripping over. He hasn't been in anything since.'

Adrian put the note down and yawned.

'He's probably been swotting for his Part One's. He was always that kind of creep. Hand me Justin and Miroslav.'

Adrian noticed that the permanent puddle in the passageway between King's and St Catharine's had iced over. Spring was having to make a fight of it. He wrapped Miroslav, his cashmere scarf, closer round him as he stepped out into the icy gale that blasted along King's Parade. They used to say that Cambridge was the first stopping place for the wind that swept down from the Urals: in the thirties that was as true of the politics as the weather.

Adrian wondered whether he mightn't become political himself. Always one to walk the other way from trends, he sensed that left-wingery was about to become very unfashionable. Long hair was out, flared jeans were out, soon there would be no more cakes and ale, canapes and Sancerre at best, Ryvita and mineral water at worst. Trefusis complained that the modern undergraduate was a cruel disappointment to him.

'They're all getting firsts and married these days, if you'll forgive the syllepsis,' he had said once. 'Decency, discipline and dullness. There's no lightness of touch any more, no irresponsibility. Do you remember that damning description of Leonard Bast in Howards End? "He had given up the glory of the animal for a tail-coat and a set of ideas." Change tail-coat to pin-stripe and you have modern Cambridge. There's no lack of respect today, that's what I miss.'

As Adrian hurried past the Senate House he noticed two old men standing outside Bowes and Bowes. He put an extra spring in his step, a thing he often did when walking near the elderly. He imagined old people would look at his athletic bounce with a misty longing for their own youth. Not that he was trying to show off or rub salt into the wounds of the infirm, he really believed he was offering a service, an opportunity for nostalgia, like whistling the theme tune from Happidrome or spinning a Diabolo.

He skipped past them with carefree ease, missed his footing and fell to the ground with a thump. One of the old men helped him up.

'You all right, lad?'

'Yes fine ... I must have slipped on the ice.'

Using Justin, his umbrella, as a walking-stick, he hobbled down Trinity Street, ruthlessly mocking himself.

'Adrian, you're an arse. In a world of arses, you are the arsiest by a mile. Stop being an arse at once, or I'll never talk to you again. So there.'

'Is there a problem, sir?'

'Oh sorry, no . . .I was just. . . humming to myself.'

He hadn't realised he'd been talking out loud. The Trinity porter stared at him suspiciously, so as Adrian limped into Great Court, he broke into more definite and deliberate song to prove his point.

'How do you solve a problem like Maria?' he fluted. 'How do you catch a cloud and pin it down? How do you find a word that means Maria? A flibbertigibbet, a will o'the wisp, a clown.'

Hugo's rooms were in the corner tower. The same tower where Lord Byron had kept his bear, arousing the wrath of the college authorities, who had told him sniffily that the keeping of domestic animals in rooms was strictly forbidden. Byron had assured them that it was far from a domestic animal. It was an untamed bear, as wild and savage as could be, and they had been reluctantly obliged to let him keep it.

'How do you solve a problem like Maria? How do you hold a moonbeam in your hand?'

Hugo opened the door.

'I brought a jar of anchovy paste, half a dozen potato farls and a packet of my own special blend of Formosan Oolong and Orange Pekoe,' said Adrian, 'but I was set upon by a gang of footpads outside Caius and they stole it all.'

'That's all right,' said Hugo. 'I've got some wine.'

Which was about all he seemed to have. He poured out two mugfuls.

'Very nice,' said Adrian, sipping appreciatively. 'I wonder how they got the cat to sit on the bottle.'

'It's cheap, that's the main thing.'

Adrian looked round the room. From the quantity of empty bottles about the place he supposed that cheapness must indeed have been the deciding factor in Hugo's wine-buying policy. The place was very meanly appointed; apart from the usual college tables and chairs, the only things of interest that met Adrian's inquisitive scrutiny were a photograph of Hugo's actress mother on the table, a Peter Flowerbuck poster on the wall which showed Adrian in a tall hat leading Hugo away from a snarling Gary, a handful of Penguin classics, a guitar, some LPs and a record-player.

'So anyway Hugo, my old penny bun. How is everything?'

'Everything,' said Hugo, 'is terrible.'

It didn't look it. Drink never shows in the faces of the young. Hugo's eye was bright, his complexion fine and his figure trim.

'Work is it?'

'No, no. I've just been thinking a lot lately.'

'Well, that's what we're here for, I suppose.'

Hugo filled up his mug with more wine.

'I just want to see if I've got you straight. You seduce me in my first year at school and then ignore me completely until you make up a lie about Pigs Trotter having been in love with me . . . Julian Rundell told me the truth about that, by the way. Then you seduce me again by pretending to be asleep. Years later, after having cheated my prep school out of a cricket victory, you tell me that you weren't really asleep that night, which I didn't in fact know, even though I said I did. Then what happens? Oh yes, you write a fake Dickens novel describing a character who looks like me and just happens to make love to someone who looks like you while that person just happens to be asleep. I think that's everything. You see, all I want to know is . . . what have I done?'

'Hugo, I know it seems . . .'

'It worries me, you see. I must have done something terrible to you without knowing it and I'd like it all to stop now, please.'

'Oh God,' said Adrian.

It was so hard to connect this man with Cartwright. If Hugo had taught at another prep school and gone to another university, the memory of him wouldn't be muddied by a sight like this alien Hugo who trembled and wept into his wine. It was another person of course, molecularly every part of the old Cartwright must have been replaced dozens of times since he, had been the most beautiful person who ever walked the earth. And the old Adrian who had loved him was not the same as the Adrian who beheld him now. It was like the philosopher's axe. After a few years the philosopher replaces the head, later he replaces the shaft. Then the head wears out and he replaces it again, next the shaft again. Can he go on calling it the same axe? Why should this new Adrian be responsible for the sins of the old?

'It's so easy to explain, Hugo. Easy and very hard. Just one word covers it all.'

'What word? No word could explain it. Not a whole Bible of words.'

'It's a common enough word, but it might mean something different to you than it does to me. Language is a bastard. So let's invent a new word. "Libb" will do. I libbed you. That's all there is to it. I was in libb with you. My libb for you informed my every waking and sleeping hour for . . . for God knows how many years. Nothing has ever been as powerful as that libb. It was the guiding force of my life, it haunted me then and haunts me still.'

'You were in love with me?'

'Well now, that's your word. Libb has a great deal in common with love, I admit. But love is supposed to be creative, not destructive, and as you have found out, my libb turned out to be very harmful indeed.'

Hugo gripped the rim of his mug and stared into his wine.

'Why can't you . . .'

'Yes?'

'I mean . . . everything you do . . . that bloody magazine, the being asleep, the cricket match, that Dickens novel . . . everything you do is ... is ... I don't know what it is.'

'Duplicitous? Covert? Underhand? Sly? Devious? Evasive?'

'All of those things. Why have you never come out and said anything or done anything in the open?'

'I'm fucked if I know, Hugo. I'm seriously fucked if I know. Perhaps because I'm a coward. Perhaps because I don't exist except in borrowed clothes. I used to think everyone but me was a fraud. It's simple logic to realise that, except to a madman, the opposite must have been the truth.'

'Hell's bells, Adrian. Have you any idea how much I admired you? Any idea at all? Your talent? You used to come into the changing-room sometimes dressed as Oscar Wilde or Noel Coward or whoever and stride up and down like a prince. You used to make me feel so small. All the things you can do. My mother thinks I'm a bore. I used to wish I could be you. I fantasised being you. I would lie awake at night imagining what it would be like to have your tall body and your smile, your wit and words. And of course I loved you. I didn't libb you or lobb you or lubb you or labb you, I loved you.'

'Oh lord,' sighed Adrian. 'If I find a way of expressing adequately now what I am thinking and feeling you will take it to be a piece of verbal dexterity and the latest in a long line of verbal malversations. You see! I can't even say "deceit". I have to say "verbal malversations". Everyone's honest but me. So perhaps I should just whine and moan wordlessly.'

Adrian opened the window and howled into Great Court like a demented muezzin, taking the performance so far as to produce real tears. When he turned to face back into the room Hugo was laughing.

'What they call keening, I believe,' said Adrian.

'Well, there's always the cliche,' Hugo said, extending his hand. 'We can be just good friends now.'

'Here's looking at you, kid.'

'Here's looking at you, kid.'

'We'll always have Paris.'

'We'll always have Paris.'

Adrian raised his mug of wine. 'Here's death to the past.'

'Death to the past.'





A Tweed, a Shapeless Green Needlecord Jacket and an Eau de Nil Chanel Suit sat in conference in the Savile Club Sand Pit.

'I'm very much afraid that someone in St Matthew's is not to be trusted.'

'Garth, you think?'' asked the Shapeless Green Needlecord.

'Garth is much as he was in your day, Humphrey. Maddening, sour, truculent and asper. Not a natural player, I feel. Not a concealer. It is also very unlikely that he would have been introduced at this late stage.'

'Have you heard from Bela?' the Chanel Suit wanted to know.

'Not a whisper. He knows that the Budapest network have him under the tightest possible surveillance. Pearce is playing for very high stakes this time.'

'Don't I know it!' said the Eau de Nil Suit. 'My bag burst in the middle of Waitrose's yesterday.'

The others giggled like schoolchildren.

'Oh dear me,' said the Tweed. 'However did you explain it?'

'I didn't. I just fled, leaving my shopping behind. I don't know if I can ever show my face in there again.'

They drank tea in companionable silence.

'Who then?' asked the Needlecord suddenly. 'If not Garth?'

The Tweed made a suggestion.

'Donald, no!'protested the Eau de Nil Suit.

The Tweed shrugged apologetically.

'What a howling shit.'

'Well, perhaps his insertion into play may turn out to be rather a useful development.'

'I don't see how.'

'He's plasticine.'

'Outdated you mean?'

'Not Pleistocene, Humphrey. Plasticine. We had all considered him as a possible player for the future, had we not? We know what a shifty little soul he is. Much better to have him as an enemy than as a friend. This is all turning out to be much more fun and much more complex than I had anticipated. The plot thickens like finest Devon cream.'

'If Pearce is going to play dirty like this, Donald, shouldn't we do the same?'

'Humphrey's right, you know,' said the Chanel Suit. lWhy don't I ask Nancy and Simon if they can't lend a hand?'

'Tug of loyalties?' the Tweed wondered. 7 mean Simon works for Pearce, after all.'

'I like to hope,' said the Eau de Nil Chanel Suit, 'that Simon's real loyalties go deeper than that.'

'Very well then. Recruit them and familiarise them with the ground rules. Stefan is due in England soon. He will have news from and of Bela. You know, this is all highly satisfactory.'

'It's not going to get out of control is it?' asked the Needlecord. 'I'm not sure I like the introduction of killing. Pearce cannot bear to be beaten, you know.'

'No more can I,' said the Tweed. 'And I won't be.'





Five

'You were his best friend,' Mrs Trotter said. 'He talked about you a great deal, how clever and amusing you were. He was very fond of you.'

'Well, Mrs Trotter,' said Adrian, 'I was very fond of him. We all were.'

'I do hope you and . . . and the other boy . . . Cartwright . . . can come to the funeral.'

She looked just like Pigs when she cried.

That evening the whole House was already in a slightly hysterical state by the time Tickford broke the news officially at House Compline.

'Some of you, I don't know . . . may know,' he said, '. . .may have heard, I don't know, that there has been a tragedy here. Paul Trotter took his own life this afternoon. We have no idea why. We don't know. We just don't know. We can't know.'

Fifty pairs of eyes swivelled towards Adrian, wondering. Why had be been sent for first? Why had he been shut up with Tickford and Pigs's parents for so long?

Cartwright had not yet been spoken to. He knew nothing and his eyes turned towards Adrian too, large and full of awe.

'I'm afraid he must have been very unhappy,' continued Tickford, apparently to the ceiling. 'Very unhappy, I don't know why. But we shall say a prayer for him and commend his soul to God. Almighty Father . . .'

Adrian felt a thigh being pressed against his as he knelt to pray. It was Rundell.

'What?'

'I saw him,' whispered Rundell. 'Yesterday afternoon in the cemetery, he went up and sat next to you!'

'So what?'

'Refresh him with your Mercy, cleanse him with your Love . . .'

'And then you came down together and he was crying.'

'That has nothing to do with it.'

'In the name of your Son who died that all might have eternal life 'Oh, yeah?'

'Amen.'

Tom asked no questions and Adrian couldn't bring himself to tell him anything.

Biffo had sent a note the next morning. 'What terribly upsetting news, terribly upsetting. Helen and I were so distressed. I taught Trotter last year; such a delightful boy. I do hope you feel free to come and talk to me about it. If you would like to, of course. Helen and I would be delighted if you could make more of our Friday afternoon visits this term. With every sympathy at this dreadful time. Humphrey Biffen.'

Tom and Adrian were playing cribbage during the afternoon when there was a knock at the door.

'Avanti!'

It was Cartwright, looking frightened.

'Can I have a word with you, Healey?'

Tom saw the expression on Cartwright's face and reached for a book and a pair of sunglasses.

'I'd better grow.'

'Thanks, Thompson.' Cartwright stood looking at the floor and waited for Tom to close the door behind him.

'Sit down do,' said Adrian.

'I've just been to see Tickford,' said Cartwright, either not hearing or not heeding the invitation.

'Oh, ah?'

'He said Trotter had some sort of ... a kind of crush on me. And that you told him that.'

'Well, that's what Trotter told me.'

'But I didn't even know him!'

Adrian shrugged.

'I'm sorry, Cartwright, but you know what this place is like.'

Cartwright sat down in Tom's chair and stared out of the window.

'Oh hell's bells. It'll be all over the school.'

'Of course it won't be,' said Adrian. 'Tickford won't tell anyone. I certainly won't tell anyone. I mean, I haven't even told Thompson and I tell him everything.'

'But Tick says I've got to go to the funeral. What will people think of that?'

'Well. . .' said Adrian, thinking fast. 'I'm going to the funeral too. I'll put it around that your parents are friends of Trotter's parents.'

'I suppose that'll do,' said Cartwright, 'but why did you have to tell Tick in the first place?'

'It was suicide! He left a note. It said "Healey will explain" or something like that. What else could I do but tell the truth?'

Cartwright looked up at him.

'Did Pigs, did Trotter say . . . did he tell you how long he'd had this, this thing for me?'

'Since you came to the school apparently.'

Cartwright dropped his head and stared at the floor. When he looked up again there were tears in his eyes. He looked angry. Angry and to Adrian more beautiful than ever.

'Why did he tell you?' he cried. 'Why couldn't he have told me? And what did he have to go and kill himself for?'

Adrian felt taken aback by the anger in Cartwright's voice.

'Well, I suppose he was scared in case . . . in case you rejected him or something. I don't know how these things work.'

'More scared of me rejecting him than he was of killing himself?'

Adrian nodded.

'So now I'm going to have to wake up every morning for the rest of my life knowing that I'm responsible for someone's suicide.'

The tears splashed down his face. Adrian leant forward and held his shoulder.

'You must never think of it like that, Hugo. You mustn't!' he said.

He had never called him Hugo before and he hadn't touched him since their brief how-do-you-do in the House lavs, which was before Adrian had known he was in love.

'I'm as responsible as you are, really,' Adrian said. 'More responsible, if anything.'

Cartwright stared in surprise.

'How do you mean?'

'Well,' said Adrian, 'I could have advised Trotter to tell you, couldn't I? I could have told him not to bottle it up.'

'But you weren't to know what was going to happen.'

'And nor were you, Hugo. Now come on, dry your eyes, or people will really know something is wrong. We'll go to the funeral and then in a couple of weeks we'll have forgotten all about it.'

'Thanks, Healey. I'm sorry to be so . . .'

'Adrian. And there's nothing to be sorry about.'

Between that day and the day they travelled up to Harrogate they hadn't exchanged a word. Adrian had seen him mobbing around with his friends as if nothing had happened. The House did its best to forget the whole embarrassment. Trotter was thought of with the kind of contempt and revulsion young Englishmen of the right type reserve for the sick, the mad, the poor and the old.

The funeral was set for ten in the morning, so Tickford had decided that they should travel up the evening before and spend the night in a hotel. For the whole duration of the journey Cartwright stared out of the window.

He's beginning to resent Trotter's posthumous power over him, Adrian thought.

The Tickfords didn't speak much either. This was a duty they did not relish. Adrian, never a tidy traveller, twice had to ask Ma Tickford, who was driving, to stop the car so that he could be sick.

He couldn't imagine why he had dropped Cartwright in it the way he had. A kind of revenge he supposed. But revenge for what? And on whom? A revenge on the ghost of Trotter or on the living, breathing Cartwright?

He wasn't Woody Nightshade, he was Deadly Nightshade. Everybody who had anything to do with him was lethally poisoned.

But they don't exist, he kept repeating to himself as they rattled up the AI. Other people don't exist. Trotter isn't really dead because he was never really alive. It's all just a clever way of testing me. There's no one in these cars and lorries driving south. There can't be that many individual souls. Not souls like mine. There isn't room. There can't be.

But suppose Trotter's ghost watched him? Trotter would know everything by now. Would he forgive him?

From now on, I conform.

He should have guessed that Tickford would give him and Cartwright a twin room at the hotel. The bill was being settled by the school, after all.

Their room was at the end of a creaking corridor. Adrian opened the door and bowed Cartwright in.

Manly, unconcerned and businesslike, he told himself. Two healthy English school chums sharing digs. Holmes and Watson, Bunny and Raffles. Nothing else.

'So, Cartwright old boy - which bed do you fancy?'

'I don't mind really. This one'll do fine.'

'Okay. Bags the bathroom first, then.'

Like all the English hotels Adrian had ever stayed in, this one was appallingly overheated. He undressed and slipped naked into bed while Cartwright brushed his teeth in the bathroom.

Now then, Healey, he warned himself. You're to behave. Understand?

He switched out the light above his bed just as Cartwright came out, magnificently clad in sky-blue pyjamas of brushed cotton, swinging a sponge-bag from his wrist.

'Night then, Cartwright.'

'Night.'

Adrian closed his eyes. He heard Cartwright shuffle off his slippers and get into bed.

Don't let him turn his light off. Make him pick up a book. Please, God, please.

He strained his ears and caught the sound of a page turning.

Thank you, God. You're a treasure.

During the next five minutes Adrian allowed his breathing naturally to deepen into a slow rhythm until any observer would swear that he was fast asleep.

He then began to give the impression of a more troubled rest. He turned and gave a small moan. The eiderdown fell to the floor. He rolled over far to one side, causing the top sheet to come away. A minute later he turned the other way violently, kicking with his foot so that the sheet joined the eiderdown.

He was now naked on the bed, breathing heavily and writhing. Cartwright's light was still on but the pages had stopped turning.

'Adrian?'

It had been a light whisper, but Cartwright had definitely spoken.

'Adrian . . .' Adrian mumbled in return, half snoring the word as he turned to face Cartwright, mouth open, eyes closed.

'Adrian, are you all right?'

'No one left in the valley,' said Adrian, flinging out a hand.

He heard Cartwright's bed creak.

Here we go, he thought to himself, here we bloody well go!

Cartwright's feet padded across the room.

He's next to me, I can sense it!

'I'il eat them later . . . later,' he moaned.

He heard the rustle of a sheet and felt the eiderdown being pulled on top of him.

He can't just be going to tuck me up! He can't be. I've got a stiffy like a milk-bottle. Is he flesh and blood or what? Oh well, here goes. Nothing ventured, nothing gained.

He arched his body and thrashed his legs up and down.

'Lucy?' he called, quite loudly this time.

Where he got the name Lucy from, he had no idea.

'Lucy?'

He swept out an arm and found Cartwright's shoulder.

'Lucy, is that you?'

The eiderdown was slowly pulled away from him again. Suddenly he felt a warm hand between his thighs.

'Yes,' he said, 'yes.'

Then soft hair brushing against his chest and a tongue licking his stomach.

Hugo, he sighed to himself. Hugo! and out loud, 'Oh Lucy -Lucy!'

He was awoken by the sound of a lavatory flushing. The eiderdown was on top of him and the sun was shining through a gap in the curtains.

'Oh God. What have I done?'

Cartwright came out of the bathroom.

'Morning,' he said brightly.

'Hi,' mumbled Adrian, 'what the hell time is it?'

'Seven thirty. Sleep all right?'

'Jesus, like a log. And you?'

'Not too badly. You talked a lot.'

'Oh sorry,' said Adrian, 'I do that sometimes. I hope it didn't keep you awake.'

'You kept saying Lucy. Who's Lucy?'

'Really?' Adrian frowned. 'Well, I used to have a dog called Lucy . . .'

'Oh, right,' said Cartwright. 'I wondered.'

'Works every time,' Adrian said to himself, turning over and going back to sleep.

It was a small funeral. A small funeral for a small life. Trotter's parents were pleased to see Adrian again and were polite to Cartwright, but they couldn't entirely disguise their distaste for him. His beauty, pale in a dark suit, was an affront to the memory of their pudgy and ordinary son.

After the ceremony they drove to the Trotters1 farmhouse five miles outside Harrogate. One of Pigs Trotter's sisters gave Adrian a photograph of himself. It showed him lying on his stomach watching a cricket match. Adrian tried hard but couldn't remember Pigs Trotter taking it. No one commented on the fact that Trotter kept no photographs of Cartwright.

Mr Trotter asked Adrian if he would come and stay in the summer holidays.

'You ever sheared sheep before?'

'No, sir.'

'You'll enjoy it.'

Tickford took the wheel for the homeward journey. Adrian was allowed in the front next to him. They didn't want to risk him being sick again.

'A sorry business,'said Tickford.

'Yes, sir.'

Tickford gestured over his shoulder towards Cartwright, who was leaning against Ma Tickford and snoring gently.

'I hope you haven't told anyone,' he said.

'No, sir.'

'You must get on with the term now, Adrian. It has not started well. That disgusting magazine and now this . . . all in the first week. There's a bad spirit abroad, I wonder if I can look to you to help combat it?'

'Well, sir '

'This may be just the jolt you need to start taking yourself seriously at last. Boys like you have a profound influence. Whether it is used for good or evil can make the difference between a happy and an unhappy school.'

'Yes, sir.'

Tickford patted Adrian's knee.

'I have a feeling that I can rely on you,' he said.

'You can, sir,' said Adrian. 'I promise.'



It was four o'clock when they got back. Adrian returned to his study to find it empty. Tom was obviously having tea somewhere else.

He couldn't be bothered to track him down, so he made toast on his own and started on some overdue Latin prep. If he was going to turn over a new leaf then there was no time like the present. Then he would write back to Biffo. Attend all his Friday afernoons. Read more. Think more.

He had hardly begun before there came a knock at the door.

'Come in!'

It was Bennett-Jones.

'Really, R.B.-J. Flattered as I am by your fawning attentions I must ask you to find another playmate. I am a busy man. Virgil calls to me from across the centuries.'

'Yeah?' said Bennett-Jones with a nasty leer. 'Well it just so happens that Mr Tickford calls to you from across his study, an'all.'

'Dear me! Five minutes' separation and already he pines for me. Perhaps he wants my advice on demoting some of the prefecture. Well, I am always happy to look in on dear Jeremy. Lead the way, young man, lead the way.'

Tickford was standing behind his desk, his face deathly white.

'This book,' he said, holding up a paperback, 'does it belong to you?'

Oh Christ... oh Jesus Christ . . .

It was Adrian's copy of The Naked Lunch.

'I... I don't know, sir.'

'It was found in your study. It has your name written in it. No other boy in the school has a copy in their study. On the instructions of the headmaster the prefects checked this morning. Now, answer me again. Is this your book?'

'Yes, sir.'

'Just tell me one thing, Healey. Did you write the magazine alone or were there others?'

'I–'

'Answer me!' shouted Tickford, slamming the book down onto the desk.

'Alone, sir.'

There was a pause. Tickford stared at Adrian, breathing heavily from his nostrils like a cornered bull.

Oh cuntly cunt. He's going to hit me. He's out of control.

'Go to your study,' said Tickford at last. 'Stay there until your parents come for you. No one is to see you or talk to you.'

'Sir, I–'

'Now get out of my sight, you poisonous little shit.'





A Peaked Cap, waving a sheet of typescript, hurried into the Customs office where a Dark Grey Suit was watching television.

'Comrade Captain,' he said. 7 have the inventory of the delegation's luggage.'

'You can cut out the Comrade crap for a start,' said the Dark Grey Suit, taking the proffered sheet.

'Szabo's articles are itemised at the top, sir.'

'I can read.'

The Dark Grey Suit scanned the list.

'And you searched the rest of the team just as thoroughly?'

'Just as thoroughly Com– Captain Molgar, sir.'

'The chess books have been checked?'

'They have all been checked and replaced with identical copies in case of . . .'the Peaked Cap gestured hopefully. He had no idea what the original chess books might have contained. 'In case of. . . microdots?'he whispered.

The Dark Grey Suit snorted contemptuously.

'This radio in Ribli's luggage?'

'A perfectly ordinary radio, Captain. Comrade Ribli has taken it abroad many times. He is not under suspicion also?'

The Dark Grey Suit ignored the question.

'Csom's suitcase seems to be very heavy.'

'It is an old case. Leather.'

'Have it X-rayed.'

'Yes, sir.'

'Yes, Captain.'

'Yes, Captain.'

'That's better.'

The Peaked Cap coughed.

'Captain, sir, why do you let this Szabo out of the country if he is . . .?'

'If he is what?'

'I-I don't quite know, sir.'

'Szabo is one of the most talented young grandmasters in the world. The next Portisch. All this checking is simply a routine test of your efficiency, nothing more. You understand?'

Yes, Captain.''

'Yes, Comrade Captain.'

'Yes, Comrade Captain.'

The Dark Grey Suit hummed to himself. He did not know what they were looking for either. But the British had been paying him a great deal for many years and now that they suddenly wanted him to work for his money he supposed he had no business complaining. This was not dangerous work, after all. He was doing no more than his usual duty and if the authorities discovered his unusual interest in Szabo they would be more likely to reward him for his zeal than shoot him for his treachery.

He had hoiked out Szabo's file that morning to see if there was anything there to justify this sudden British directive. There was nothing there: Stefan Szabo, a perfectly blameless citizen, grandson of a Hungarian hero and a great chess hope.

The solution came to the Dark Grey Suit in a blinding flash. Stefan Szabo was planning, sometime during the tournament in Hastings, to defect. The British needed to check that he was an honest defector, that he was not bringing any equipment out with him that would suggest a darker purpose.

But why should a successful chess-player need to defect? They made plenty of money, which they were allowed to keep, they were granted unlimited travel abroad, foreign bank accounts. Hungary was not Russia or Czechoslovakia, for God's sake. The Dark Grey Suit, who had betrayed his country for years, felt a stab of resentment and anger against this young traitor.

'Little shit,' he thought to himself. 'What's wrong with Hungary that he needs to run away to England?'





Six

Just as Adrian was getting thoroughly bored, the President started to wind up the meeting.

'Now,' he said, 'it's getting rather late. If there is no further business, I would like to - '

Garth Menzies rose to his feet and smiled the smile of the just.

'There is one thing, Master.'

'Can't it wait?'

'No, sir. I don't believe it can.'

'Oh, very well then.'

Adrian cursed inwardly. They all knew the subject Menzies was going to raise and Menzies knew that they knew. They had been given the chance to raise it themselves but they hadn't. So be it. Very well. Other men might shrink from their duty, but not Garth Menzies.

He barked his throat clear.

'I am amazed, Mr President, absolutely amazed that this meeting can contemplate adjournment without first discussing the Trefusis Affair.'

A dozen heads looked sharply down at their agenda papers. A dozen pairs of buttocks clenched tightly together.

He had said it. The man had said it. Such a want of delicacy. Such wounding impropriety.

At the far end of the table a mathematician specialising in fluid dynamics and the seduction of first year Newnham girls blew his nose in a hurt manner.

Those parts of Adrian that weren't already looking sharply down or clenching tightly together contrived to quiver with disfavour.

How incredibly like Garth to bring up the one subject that everyone else in the room had been so elegantly avoiding. How childish the rhetoric with which he claimed to be amazed at that avoidance.

'I find myself wondering,' said Menzies, 'how we feel about having a criminal amongst us?'

'Now, really Garth–'

'Oh yes, Master, a criminal.'

Menzies, tall and thin, face as white, shiny and bold Roman as the cover page of the quarterly journal of civil law it was his pride to edit, had placed his left thumb along the lapel of his coat and now he stooped forwards from the waist, waving in his right hand, in what he hoped was a brandish, a copy of the Cambridge Evening News.

Adrian found himself chilled by the sight of a grown man trying so transparently to strike the forensic pose of a glamorous barrister. No matter how he aged, and there was not now one dark hair on his head, Menzies could never look any grander than a smart-arsed sixth-former. A smart-arsed grammar-school sixth-former, Adrian thought. He cut a dreadful sort of Enoch Powell figure. A kind of adolescent Malvolio, all elbows and shiny temples. Adrian found Menzies as tiresome as his archetypes; unspeakable to behold, dangerous to discount.

Menzies resented his widespread popularity because he felt it sprang from illogical and irrelevant factors like his breath, his voice, his sniffs, his gait, his clothes, his whole atmosphere. For that reason he devoted himself with all the dismal diligence of the dull to giving the world more legitimate grounds for dislike. That, at least, was Adrian's interpretation. Donald always claimed to like the man.

If Donald had been present to witness him now, newspaper in hand and destruction in mind, Adrian was sure he would have altered his opinion.

President Clinton-Lacey, at the head of the table, looked down at his agenda and shaded his eyes. From under his hand he waggled a covert eyebrow at Adrian like a schoolboy sharing a joke under a desk-lid. But there was an urgency and seriousness in the look which told Adrian that he was being given some kind of signal.

Adrian wasn't sure if he could interpret it. He stared ahead of him, perplexed. Did the President want him, as a friend of Donald's, to speak up? Was he warning Adrian not to let his feelings get the better of him? What? He returned the look with a questioning lift of his own eyebrows.

In reply the President gave a 'yackety-yack' gesture with his hand.

Clinton-Lacey's Boltonian sense of humour was notorious but surely he meant something more than 'Oh, that Menzies, he does go on, doesn't he?'

Adrian decided it must be a demand for him to do some filibustering. He swallowed nervously. He was only an undergraduate after all and these were not the sixties. The days of genuine student representation on the boards of governors of the colleges were long gone. It was understood that he was a constitutional hiccough that it would have been embarrassing to cure. He was there to listen, not to comment.

However.

'Don't you think, Dr Menzies,' he began, not daring to look up, 'that the word "criminal" is a bit strong?'

Menzies rounded on him.

'Forgive me, Mr Healey, you are the English student. I am just a lawyer. What on earth would I know about the word criminal? In my profession, out of ignorance no doubt, we use the word to describe someone who has broken the law. I am sure you could entertain us with an essay on the word's origin that would prove conclusively that a criminal is some kind of medieval crossbow. For my purposes however, in law, the man is a criminal.'

'Now, gentlemen . . .'

'Dr Menzies' clumsy sarcasm aside,' said Adrian, 'I have to say that I know full well what criminal means and it is a perfectly ordinary English word, not a legal term, and I resent it being used of Donald. It makes him sound like a professional. One crime doesn't make a criminal. It would be like calling Dr Menzies a lawyer just because thirty years ago he practised briefly at the Bar.'

'I have every right in the world, Mr President,' shrilled Menzies, 'to call myself a lawyer. I believe my reputation in the legal field has done nothing but reflect credit on this institution '

'Perhaps it wouldn't be unfitting if I said something here,' said Tim Anderson. His book on Jean-Luc Godard had recently been exceptionally well reviewed by his wife in Granta magazine and he was in a less solemn mood than usual.

'I think it would be immensely unfitting,' snapped Menzies.

'Well that's a not uninteresting point, certainly,' said Anderson, 'but I was thinking more that I don't know many people who couldn't express doubt about the strategies that the authorities adopt in situations not a million miles dissimilar to this one and I just don't think that's something we shouldn't be unafraid to shirk addressing or confronting. That's all.'

'I have just been told by a student that I have no right to call myself a lawyer, Master,' said Menzies. 'I await an apology.'

'Dr Menzies is an academic,' said Adrian. 'He is a teacher. I'd have thought that that was quite enough of a profession for one man. I maintain that he is not a lawyer. Law just happens to be the subject he teaches.'

'I am not absolutely sure that I see the relevance of this,' said the President and something in the tone of his voice made Adrian look at him again. He was rolling an eye in the direction of the corner of the room.

The cameras!

Since the beginning of this, Adrian's third and final year, St Matthew's had put up with a television crew on the premises. Their technique, that of becoming part of the furniture, was working so well that they had become appallingly easy to ignore. They had lived up to the name of fly-on-the-wall and only the odd irritating buzz reminded the college of their existence.

It was clear that the President did not want Adrian to forget them. He could not possibly allow anything of the Trefusis Affair to be seen on national television. Adrian's duty lay clear ahead of him. He had to find a way of doing or saying something that would make the film of the meeting, or this part of it, unsuitable for family viewing.

He took a deep breath.

'I'm sorry, Master,' he said, snapping a pencil, 'but the point is that I won't sit here and hear my friend insulted, not if the accuser is the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Procurator Pissing Fiscal and the Witchfinder Fucking General all rolled into one.'

A splutter of incredulity from a middle-aged Orientalist met this unusual outburst.

'Donald has been called a criminal,' Adrian went on, warming to his theme. 'If I run down the street to catch a bus, does that make me an athlete? If you yodel in the bath, Master, does that make you a singer? Dr Menzies has a tongue like a supermarket pricing-gun.'

'Twisting my words won't help.'

'Untwisting them might.'

'Well untwist these words, then,' said Menzies, forcing his copy of the newspaper under Adrian's nose.

'What the yellow rubbery fuck do you think you're up to now?' said Adrian, pushing the newspaper away. 'If I want to blow my nose, I'll use a frigging snot-rag.'

'Healey, have you run mad?' hissed Corder, a theologian, sitting next to Adrian.

'Stick it up your heretical arse.'

'Well!'

'Explain it to you later,' said Adrian in an undertone.

'Oh, it's a game!'

'Sh!'

'Splendid!' whispered Corder, and then sang out, 'Oh, do come on, Garth, get a sodding move on.'

'Well,' said Menzies. 'I have no idea what childish motive you have for hurling abuse at me, Mr Healey. Perhaps you think it is funny. At the risk of being told that I have no sense of humour I am quite prepared to suggest that even an undergraduate audience would remain unmoved by the spectacle of a student insulting one more than twice his age. As for Dr Corder, I can only assume that the man is drunk.'

'Piss off, you fat tit,' said Corder primly.

'Mr President, are they to be allowed to continue in this fashion?'

'Dr Corder, Mr Healey, let Dr Menzies have his say, please,' said the President.

'Right you fucking are, Mr President,' said Adrian, standing up and immediately sitting down again. He had noticed that the microphone boom was only a few inches higher than his head. If he kept standing up he had a notion it would appear in shot and spoil the footage.

'You have the floor, farty,' said Corder.

'I think I'd better say for my own part,' said Tim Anderson, 'that notwithstanding '

'Thank you,' said Menzies.

Adrian burped loudly and felt with his feet for the TV cabling which ran under the table.

'Now, for those of you have not seen it,' Menzies continued, fishing his spectacles out of his jacket pocket, 'there is an article in this evening's local paper which is of exceptional interest to this college. I shall read it to you.

'"Professor Donald Trefusis,'" he intoned, in that awful declamatory chant reserved by politicians for public readings of I Corinthians 13, '"holder of the Regius Chair in Philology and Senior Tutor of St Matthew's College, appeared at Cambridge magistrate's court this morning charged with gross indecency . . ."'

Menzies broke off. While he had been speaking a large electric lamp in the corner of the room had begun to totter on its base. It creaked on its stand, unable to make up its mind whether to crash to the ground or return to an upright position. By the time a technician had noticed and started to run across to save it, it had decided on the floor. It was the noise of the ten kilowatt bulb exploding that had interrupted Menzie's flow.

'Oh dear,' said Adrian, standing up, distraught. 'I think my feet may inadvertently have become tangled up in your cables for a moment. I'm so sorry . . .'

The BBC director smiled at him through clenched teeth.

'If Mr Healey can manage to sit still for just three minutes,' Menzies continued, 'I shall resume . . .'

'You had got as far as gross indecency,' said Adrian.

'Thank you. "... charged with gross indecency. The Professor had been arrested in the Parker's Piece men's toilet at three o'clock the previous night. A youth, described as in his late teens, escaped after a struggle with police. The Professor (66) pleaded guilty. The President of St Matthew's College was unavailable for comment this morning. Donald Trefusis, who is well-known for his articles and broadcasts, told the Evening News that life was very extraordinary."'

'Yes, well thank you, Garth,' said the President, 'I think we're all pretty much aware of the details of this morning's court-room drama. I suppose you think something should be done about it?'

'Done?' said Menzies. 'Of course something should be done!'

Adrian stood up.

'Hoover, Wrigleys, Magicote, Benson and Hedges, Sellotape, Persil, Shake and Vac, Nestles Milky Bar,' he said and sat down again. He had a vague idea that brand names couldn't be mentioned on the BBC.

'Thank you, Adrian,' said the President, 'that will do.'

'Yes sir, Mr President, sir!' said Adrian.

Tim Anderson spoke.

'I don't think I'd be wrong in detecting - '

'If an undergraduate were compromised in this fashion,' said Menzies, 'we would have no hesitation in sending him down. Professor Trefusis is a member of the college just like any student. I submit that under the college ordinance of 1273 and subsequent statutes of 1791 and 1902 we are duty bound to take disciplinary action against any Fellow who brings the good name of the college into disrepute. I move that this meeting of the Fellows immediately invite Professor Trefusis to relinquish the post of Senior Tutor and furthermore I move that they insist he withdraw from any active teaching post in this college for one year. At the very least.'

'Nice subjunctives,' murmured Adrian.

'Now steady on, Garth,' said the President. 'I'm sure we're all as shocked as you are by Donald's . . . Donald's . . . well, his behaviour. But remember where we are. This is Cambridge. We have a tradition of buggery here.'

'Bottomy is everywhere, you know,' the ninety-year-old treble of Emeritus Professor Adrian Williams sang out. 'Wittgenstein was a bottomist, they tell me. I read the other day that Morgan Foster, you remember Morgan? Next door, at King's. Wrote A Passage to India and Howards End. Wore slippers into Hall once. I read that he was a bottomite too. Extraordinary! I think everyone is now. Simply everyone.'

A red-faced statistician thumped the table angrily.

'Not I, sir, not I!' he thundered.

'I don't think we should be unafraid not to discuss the gay dialectic as an energy and the homophobic constraints that endorse its marginalisation as a functionally reactive discourse,' said Tim Anderson.

The cameraman in the corner tilted his camera from one end of the table to the other, quite unable to decide on whom to concentrate his lens.

'If I can speak,' said Adrian.

He had just unwrapped a packet of cigarettes and now scrunched up the cellophane so loudly that the microphone boom, which had just reached him, swung away like a startled giraffe and struck Menzies on the head.

A production assistant with a clipboard giggled and was rewarded with a look of foul contempt from the President.

Menzies was not to be put off.

'The fact is this, Master. There are laws. Homosexual acts are only permitted amongst consenting adults in private.'

'Are you allowed in law, Dr Menzies,' asked Adrian, 'to defecate in public?'

'Certainly not!'

'How would I be charged if I did?'

'Gross indecency, beyond question, the case of the Earl of Oxford '

'Exactly. But would I be arrested for taking a crap in a public lavatory?'

'Don't be ridiculous.'

'So a public lavatory is, in law, a private place?'

'You're twisting words again, Healey.'

'But again, the words are already twisted. Either a municipal bog is a private place or it isn't. If it is a private place in which to shit, how is it not a private place in which to fellate?'

'Oh, it was fellatio, was it?' the President seemed surprised.

'Well, whatever.'

'Who was doing it to whom, I wonder?'

Menzies' hold on his temper was weakening.

'Either the law is the law or it is not! If it is your intention to campaign for a change in that law, Healey, very good luck to you. The fact remains that Professor Trefusis has brought into disrepute the good name of this college.'

'You never liked him did you?' Adrian couldn't help saying. 'Well, here's your chance. He's down. Kick him good and hard.'

'Mr President,' said Menzies, 'I have proposed a motion to the Fellows. That Donald Trefusis be stripped of his Senior Tutorship and suspended from the college for a full year. I demand it to be put to the question.'

'Mr President,' said Adrian, 'surely Dr Menzies can't have forgotten that a motion cannot be voted on unless saving that it howmay shall as thus nemcon, neplus ultra before these presents, as witness the hand thereunto, be seconded?'

'Er . . . quite right,' said the President. 'I think. Do we have a seconder?'

Silence.

'I ask again. Do we have a seconder for Dr Menzies' proposal that Donald Trefusis be relieved of his college duties for the period of one year?'

Silence.

Menzies' chalk-white cheeks were lit with the pin-prick of crimson which, for him, passed for a manly blush.

'Madness, absolute madness! The college will live to regret it.'

'Thank you, Dr Menzies,' said the President.

He turned to the film crew.

'That is the end of the meeting. I'll ask you to go now, as we have one or two private college matters to discuss which cannot possibly be of relevance to your film.'

The crew silently gathered their equipment. The director glared at Adrian as he left the room. The female assistant .with the clipboard winked.

'I'm in there,' Adrian thought to himself.

'Now then,' said the President, when the last of the crew had gone. Tm sorry to keep you all, but I received a letter from Professor Trefusis this morning and I think you had better hear it.'

He took a letter from his inside pocket.

'"Henry,"' he read. '"By the time you read this I am very much afraid that my improvidence will already have been made known to you. I feel I must first offer the profoundest of apologies for the embarrassment I have caused to you and the college.

'"I will not burden you with reasons, excuses, denials or explanations. I have no doubt in my mind however that it would be a sensible thing for me to ask you if I might take advantage of my right to a sabbatical year. I had intended to ask this of you in any case, as my book on the Great Fricative Shift impels me to visit Europe for research materials. May I therefore take this opportunity to beg your permission to leave Cambridge immediately until sentence, which I am assured will at worst take the form of nothing more inconvenient than a small fine and at best a reprimand from the bench, has been passed upon me?

' "Perhaps you will be so kind as to let me know of your decision in this matter as soon as possible, Henry, for there are many arrangements to be made. Meanwhile, in all contrition I remain, Your good friend Donald.'"

'Well,' said Menzies at last, 'how ironic. It seems that Professor Trefusis can be credited, in some regards at least, with more decency than the rest of the fellowship.'

'Up your crack, you fat runt,' said Corder.

'The game's over now, Alex,' said Adrian. 'The film crew has gone.'

'I know,' said Corder, stuffing his briefcase with detritus from the meeting. 'That was for real.'





In a small bedroom a Striped Nightgown had been talking to a Donkey Jacket.

The tape of the conversation was being listened to by a Dark Grey Suit. He felt sorry for the Donkey Jacket having to cope with the ruined husk of a once fine mind.

The old fool was babbling of bacon and cheese.

'It's all right, Grandfather, you should rest now.'

''Steffi's cheese is in the ice-box, you see,' whimpered the Striped Nightgown.

'That's right,' soothed the Donkey Jacket. 'Of course it is.'

Your cheese is in the pantry.'

'In the pantry, that's right.'

'I saw God yesterday, he's very kind. I think he likes me.'

'I really think you should sleep, you know.'

The Donkey Jacket sounded very distressed. The Dark Grey Suit heard the sound of the old man crying.

'Told him that I hadn't had a shit in two weeks, Martin. "You won't need to in Heaven," he said. Wasn't that kind?'

'Very kind. Very kind indeed.'

'Take two kinds of cheese. Always two kinds. One for the mouse and one for the ice-box.' s

'That's right.'

'Bit of pörkelt wouldn't hurt. With some egg-dumplings and red cabbage. No sugar though.'

'Off to sleep now.'

The Dark Grey Suit heard the Donkey Jacket rise from the bed. Heard him kiss the forehead of the Striped Nightgown. Heard the Donkey Jacket's footsteps make for the door. Heard . . . a strained whisper? The Dark Grey Suit turned up the volume of his tape-recorder to maximum.

'Martin! Martin!' A hoarse, urgent command from the old man.

The Donkey Jacket's footsteps stopped near the door.

'Sew it into the lining of your jacket!'

So the old bastard was sane after all. The Dark Grey Suit reached for a pad and composed a cypher for London.





Seven

Crossing the river by way of the Sonnet Bridge on a direct course from the President's Lodge to Donald Trefusis's room in Hawthorn Tree Court, Adrian slapped each stone ball that marched along that noble structure's span in frustration. He had hated that meeting, hated the relish with which Garth Menzies had read out the article in the Cambridge Evening News, hated the bubbling looks of salacious amusement on the faces of the BBC crew. All of them laughing at Trefusis.

Hell and hot shit, he said to himself, Donald of all people.

The Tea Room Trade they called it in America; in English, Cottaging. Putting yourself up for quick sex in a public loo.

'Bad news, Adrian,' the President had said that morning. 'Donald has gone and popped up in the guise of a lavatory cowboy. He tells me he's due in court at ten thirty. The Evening News is sure to cover it. And tomorrow the nationals. What the hell are we going to do?'

Adrian remembered the times he had sprawled on Donald's chesterfield of a summer evening, hot from a game of cricket. Or the weeks they had shared hotel rooms in Venice and Florence and Salzburg during last year's long vacation. The man had never so much as touched Adrian's shoulder. But then why on earth should he have? There were plenty of lanky, languid undergraduates in the University more appetising than Adrian. Anyway, maybe Donald's tastes were more Orton than Auden. Perhaps it was only anonymous rough trade that lit his fire. Live and let live, of course: but better he should paw Adrian than kneel before some greasy truck driver to whom the name Levi Strauss meant nothing but jeans and, by blowing him, blow a reputation, a career and a way of life.

It was Adrian's last summer, but whenever he crossed the bridge, no matter how occupied he might be, he could never prevent himself from looking across at the Backs, the green train of lawn and willow that swept along the river behind the colleges. With a late afternoon mist descending on the Cam, the absurd beauty of the place depressed him deeply. Depressed him because he caught himself failing to react properly to it. There had been a time when that blend of natural and human perfection would have caused him to writhe with pleasure. But now human affairs and the responsibilities of friendship had claimed that part of him that was capable of feeling and there was nothing left over for nature or the abstract.

Donald Trefusis, a urinal Uranian, a bog bugger. Who'd've thought it?

Adrian, no stranger to sexual adventurism, had never been struck by the charms of the public lavatory as an erotic salon. There had been an occasion, not long after his expulsion from school, when he had found himself forced to answer the griping of his bowels in a Gents in the bus-station at Gloucester.

Sitting there, gently encouraging his colon, he had suddenly become aware of a note being fed through an uncomfortably large hole in the wall that divided him from the neighbouring cubicle. He had taken and read it more in an innocent spirit of good citizenship than anything else. Perhaps some unfortunate disabled person had got into trouble.

'I like young cock,' the note said.

Shocked, Adrian looked at the hole. Where the note had been there was now a human eye. Because he couldn't think of anything else to do under the circumstances, or because he was born foolish, Adrian smiled. A winning smile, accompanied by a friendly, faintly patronising wink: the kind of beaming encouragement you might give a toddler who has presented you with an incompetent drawing.

There immediately followed a shuffle of feet next door and a clink of belt buckle hitting concrete. After a brief pause, a bulky and rather excited penis pushed itself through the hole and twitched urgently.

Without pausing for hygiene and comfort, Adrian had yanked up his trousers and fled in panic. For the next half-hour he wandered Gloucester looking for a place in which he might wipe himself, not daring to risk another public convenience. To this day Adrian failed to see any allure in the lavatory. Apart from anything else the smell. And the risk . . . but risk was the whole point, he supposed.

But nonetheless, the Trefusis that he knew - the man with startled white hair and Irish thorn-proof jackets, patched at the elbows, Trefusis the Elvis Costello fan and Wolseley driver, Trefusis the sports fan and polyglot - it wasn't easy to imagine that Trefusis frenziedly gobbling at a trucker. It was like trying to picture Malcolm Muggeridge masturbating or Margaret and Denis Thatcher locked in coital ecstasy. But hard to imagine or not, these things had all presumably happened.

Adrian hopped across the lawn of Hawthorn Tree Court, a precaution learnt from schooldays.

'Healey, can't you read?' they used to shout after him.

'Oh yes, sir. I'm very good at reading, sir.'

'Then can't you see that it clearly says, Don't Walk On The Grass?'

'I'm not walking, sir. I'm hopping.'

'Don't be clever, boy.'

'All right, sir. How stupid would you like me to be, sir? Very stupid or only quite stupid?'

He threw himself up the stairs and thumped on Trefusis's oak. College rooms had two doors and if the oak, the outer door, was closed, it was generally held to be bad form to clamour for entrance. Adrian reckoned that circumstances warranted the solecism.

From within he heard a muffled curse.

'Donald, it's me. Adrian. Won't you let me in?'

After a sigh and a creak of floorboards the door opened.

'Really, couldn't you see that my oak was sported?'

'I'm sorry, but I thought '

'I know. I know what you thought. Come in, come in. I was recording.'

'Oh, sorry.'

Donald's irregular broadcasts on the radio, his 'wireless essays' as he called them, had recently given him a modest amount of fame that had kindled the resentment felt by men like Garth Menzies. Adrian found it hard to believe that, after the events of last night and this morning, Trefusis could contemplate continuing with them. He was even now rewinding the tape on his Uher recorder.

'Sit down,' he said. 'There's a rather comical Batard-Mon-trachet on the side. You might pour out two glasses.'

Now he poured out two glasses of wine and threaded his way through the librarinth towards the small study-within-a-study which contained Donald, his desk, his computer and his tape-recorder. The study was in the centre of the room and made up an inner sanctum no more than six foot square and eight foot high entirely constructed of books, mostly books in Romanian, it appeared. There was even a door. This had been made as part of the set for a student production of Travesties, which Trefusis had enjoyed. The director, Bridget Arden, a pupil of his, gave him the door as a present. It had required large stage weights to keep it upright at first, but with books stacked all round its frame it was soon as firmly wedged in place as could be.

One advantage of this strange inner room, Trefusis claimed, was that it made an excellent soundproof chamber for his broadcasts. Adrian's view was that it satisfied a vague agoraphobia, or at least claustraphilia, that he would never admit to.

Trefusis was speaking into the microphone as Adrian tiptoed through with the glasses.

'. . . and since this embarrassment in all its noble and monumental proportions will be known to you by now through the kind offices of the press, I shall, for the moment, spare you a description of its more gaudy details, although I look forward to sharing them with you in a frank, straightforward and manly way before the year is quite out. For the time being I will, if I may, take a break from these wireless essays and see something of the world. When I have found out what the world is like, be sure that I will let you know, those of you who are interested, of course, the others will simply have to guess. Meanwhile if you have been, then continue to and don't even think of stopping.'

He sighed and put the microphone down.

'Well, it's all very sad,' he said.

'Where shall I put the wine?' said Adrian, looking around for a free space.

'I should try your throat, dear boy,' said Trefusis, taking his glass and drinking it down. 'Now. I suppose you have come to tell me about the meeting?'

'It was outrageous,' said Adrian. 'Menzies was after your blood.'

'The dear man. How silly of him, it wasn't there, it was in here all the time, running through my body. He should have come and asked for it. Was he terribly cross?'

'He wasn't too pleased by my tactics, anyway.'

Trefusis looked at him in alarm.

'You didn't say anything reckless?'

Adrian explained how the meeting had gone. Trefusis shook his head.

'You are a very silly boy. Clinton-Lacey read out my letter, I suppose?'

'Yes, it rather took the wind out of Menzies' sails. But it wasn't necessary, Donald, no one else wanted you to step down. Why did you write it?'

'The heart has its reasons.'

'You've got to watch Menzies. I bet he'll fight your reappointment next year.'

'Nonsense, Garth and I simply overflow with love for each other.'

'He's your enemy, Donald!'

'He most certainly is not,' said Trefusis. 'Not unless I say so. He may dearly want to be my enemy, he may beg on bended knee for open hostility of the most violent kind, but it takes two to tangle. I choose my own enemies.'

'If you say so . . .'

'I do say so.'

Adrian sipped at the wine.

'Buttery, isn't it? The vanilla comes as a late surprise.'

'Yes, yes it's excellent. . . um . . .'

'You have a question?'

This was rather difficult.

'Donald?'

'Yes?'

'About last night . . .'

Trefusis gazed at Adrian sadly.

'Oh dear, you are not going to ask me an embarrassing question, are you?'

'Well, no,' said Adrian, 'not if it does embarrass you.'

'I meant you,' said Trefusis. 'You are not going to embarrass yourself, are you?'

Adrian gestured helplessly.

'It just seems so . . . so . . .'

'So squalid?'

'No!'said Adrian. 'I didn't mean that, I meant it seemed so . . .'

'So unlike me?'

'Well . . .'

Trefusis patted him on the shoulder.

'Let's go to the Shoulder,' he said. 'I'm sure Bob will find a nice quiet table for us.'

The Shoulder of Lamb was very crowded. Choral Scholars from St John's, limp with Pimms from an early May Week garden party, were singing an a capella version of 'Message in A Bottle' in one corner, a pair of millionaire computer designers poked each other heatedly on the chest in another. Adrian remembered how two years ago one of them had bummed cigarettes off him in the Eagle. Now his company was worth sixty million pounds.

The landlord stepped crisply forward and winked.

'Professor Trefusis, sir, and young Mr Healey!' he said, rolling his head back on his neck like a sun-struck sergeant-major. 'Bit busy this evening, sir.'

'So I see, Bob,' said Donald. 'Is there somewhere . . .?'

'I'il take you upstairs, sir.'

Bob led them through the front bar. One or two people stopped talking when they caught sight of Trefusis. Adrian was amazed at the blithe calm with which he greeted them.

'Evening, Michael! I did so enjoy your Serjeant Musgrave. Quite to the purpose. Such boots, too.'

'Simon! I see that your results were posted. A Third! You must be thrilled.'

Bob took them up the stairs.

'We was all most proud to read of your exploits in the paper, sir.'

'Why, thank you, Bob.'

'Reminds me of my old Adjutant when we was on household duties at the Palace. Fuckingham Palace we used to call it then, of course.'

'I'msure.'

'Dear oh dear, St James's Park was a sink in those days, sir. Wasn't a bush that didn't have at least one guardsman and customer in it. Course, you'll remember Colonel Bramall, won't you, sir?'

'Thank you Bob, this room will do splendidly. Perhaps Nigel could be induced to bring up a couple of the Gruaud Larose?'

'Certainly, sir. How about a nice veal and ham pie? Spot of chutney?'

'Ludicrously ideal.'

'He'll be with you in a breath, sir.'

When they had disposed of the veal and ham pie, but not the chutney, which Trefusis warned would have a most ruinous effect on the palate, he poured out two glasses of wine.

Adrian gulped at his greedily, determining that drunkenness was the only state in which to cope with his discomfort. If the Wizard of Oz was going to reveal himself as a sad and bewildered old man, Adrian didn't want to be sober when it happened.

To be fair, Donald looked about as sad and bewildered as the Laughing Cavalier as he sipped his claret and dipped his head in appreciation.

'A purist might recommend another year of ageing for the tannin to smooth out its rougher edges,' he said. 'I think it already supernacular, however.'

'It's fine,' said Adrian, pouring himself another glass.

Trefusis watched him contentedly.

'A good wine is like a woman,' he said. 'Except of course it doesn't have breasts. Or arms and a head. And it can't speak or bear children. In fact, come to think of it, a good wine isn't remotely like a woman at all. A good wine is like a good wine.'

'I'm rather like a good wine too,' said Adrian.

'You improve with age?'

'No,' said Adrian, 'whenever I'm taken out I get drunk.'

'Except that in your case you get laid down after drinking, not before.'

Adrian blushed.

'Oh dear,' said Trefusis, 'that was not a sexual allusion. Merely frivolous paronomasy on the theme of alcoholically induced unconsciousness. I was particularly pleased with "in your case". Are you to be discomfited by the potential for erotic interpretation of every remark I might make?'

'I'm sorry,' said Adrian. 'I've a feeling I'm a bad vintage.'

'That's nonsense, but very graceful. We were talking of drink, I've always believed it right for young people to drink. Not be alcoholic of course, that is a passive state of being, not a positive action. But it is good to drink to excess. That sounds like a toast. To excess.'

'To excess,' said Adrian, bumpering. 'Nothing exceeds like it.'

'Your strenuous tongue is bursting Joy's grape against your palate fine, and that's just as it should be.'

'Keats,' burped Adrian. 'Ode to Melancholy.'

'Keats indeed,' said Trefusis, refilling their glasses. 'Ode on Melancholy in fact, but we are beyond pedantry here, I hope.'

'Bollocks,' said Adrian, who hated being corrected, even kindly.

'Now,' said Trefusis, 'we should talk.

'For the moment,' he said, 'I have nothing to say on the subject of last night. One day, when the world is pinker, I will a tale unfold, whose lightest word would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood, make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, thy knotted and combined locks to part, and each particular hair to stand on end, like quills upon the fretful porpentine, and generally make you go all of a dither. But for the moment, shtum, you can keep all thoughts on the topic to yourself: zip your lip. However I do have a proposition to put to you which I would like you to consider very seriously. You have no fixed plans for next year, I think?'

'That's right.'

Adrian had made up his mind to wait until after his Finals before deciding what to do with himself. If he got a First he still planned to stay at Cambridge, otherwise he supposed he would look for a teaching job somewhere.

'How would it be, I wonder, if you were to spend the summer travelling with me?'

Adrian goggled. 'Well, I . . .'

'As you know, I shall be doing a little research for my book. But I have something else to do. There is a problem that needs sorting out, a noisesome problem but not unchallenging. I believe you will be able to offer me material assistance with it. In return I will naturally take care of all expenses, hotels, flights and so forth. It will, I think, be a tour not wholly devoid of interest and amusement. At journey's end we will both deposit ourselves back in England, you to become Prime Minister or whatever lowly ambition you have set your sights on, me to pick up the threads of a ruined and disappointed career. How does that strike you as a plan?'

It struck Adrian as Roscoe Tanner struck a tennis-ball, but how it struck him as a plan he couldn't say. His mind reeled with questions. Had Trefusis run mad? What would his parents say? Should he tell them? Did Donald expect him to share his bed? Is that what it was all about?

'Well?'

'It's . . . it's unbelievable.'

'You don't like it?'

'Like it? Of course I like it, but '

'Excellent!' Trefusis poured out two more glasses of wine. 'Then you're game?'

If I refused to sleep with him, thought Adrian, would he just kick me out and abandon me in the middle of Europe without a penny? Surely not.

'God yes!' he said. 'I'm game.'

'Wonderful!' said Trefusis. 'Then let us drink to our Grand Tour.'

'Right,' said Adrian draining his glass, 'our Grand Tour.'

Trefusis smiled.

'I'm so very pleased,' he said.

'Me too,' said Adrian, 'but. . .'

'Yes?'

'This problem you mentioned. That I may be able to help you with. What exactly . . .?'

'Ah,' said Donald. 'I'm afraid I am not yet fully at liberty, as they say, to disclose the details.'

'Oh.'

'But I don't suppose there's any harm in my asking you to cast your mind back to last summer. You remember the Salzburg Festival?'

'Vividly.'

'I am sure you haven't forgotten that terrible business in the Getreidegasse?'

'The man in the Mozart museum?'

'That same.'

'I'm hardly likely to forget it. All that blood.'

Bob appeared at the door.

'Sorry to disturb, gents. Thought you might appreciate some of this superior Armagnac brandy.'

'How solicitous!' said Trefusis.

'May I enquire, sir, whether everything went well?'

'Everything went splendidly, Bob. Splendidly.'

'Oh goody-good,' said Bob, taking three small brandy glasses from his jacket pocket. 'I'll join you then, if I may.'

'Please do, Bob, please do. Desperate times call for desperate measures, so pour us each one desperate measure.'

Bob complied.

'We were just talking about Salzburg.'

'Ooh, nasty business that, sir. Poor old Moltaj. Throat slit from ear to ear, they tell me. But then you both saw it in the flesh, didn't you, sirs?'

Adrian stared at him.

'I know you'll do right by old Moltaj, Mr Healey,' said Bob, clapping him on the shoulder. 'Course you will, sir.'





A St Matthew's Tie with Liberty silk handkerchief flamboyantly thrust into the breast pocket was bent double in Corridor Four of the third floor of Reddaway House next to the door marked '3.4.CabCom'. He seemed to be taking an unconscionable time in doing up the laces of his black Oxford shoes. It was almost impossible for him not to hear voices coming from behind the door.

'I was just thinking, sir, that what with the Bikini alert over Iran and everything . . .'

''Bugger the bloody Persians, Reeve - I have a Limit Zero Cabinet Appro on this.'

'Copeland is very keen that we should co-operate.'

'Listen to me. The Hairy Mullah is there to stay. You know it, I know it. Neither Copeland nor anyone at Langley nor over here has got a choirboy's chance in Winchester of doing anything about it. Checkmate, d'you see? I don't suppose you know what checkmate means?'

'Well. .:

'Of course you don't, you went to Oxford. Checkmate comes from the Arabic "shah mat"- the King is dead. Well the Shah is mat, all right, he's as mat as a bloody doornail, and I don't propose to waste time feeding the ambitions of his whining progeny - they can live it up in Monaco and Gstaad for the rest of their lives as far as I'm concerned. Clear the board, put the chessmen back in their box, we've got bigger capon to baste.'

'Right, sir.'

'Right. So. Report?'

'Well, sir. I'm sorry to have to make report that the ObSquad lost Castor for a day.'

What.?'

'Er . . . if you take a look at this, sir. It's a Cambridge police report.'

The St Matthew's Tie heard the wobble of a cardboard wallet being opened.

'Castor and Odysseus, eh?''

'We rather think so, sir.'

'So are you telling me that Odysseus has got the whole box of tricks now?'

'No, sir, . . if you remember our signal from Locksmith in Budapest, Castor may have given one part of Mendax to Odysseus but the other half will be with Pollux, sewn into the lining of his jacket.'

'And Pollux is still in Troy?'

'Not exactly sir. Vienna Station received another signal from Locksmith this morning, fully prioritised.'

'Fully whatted.?'

'Er . . . prioritised, sir.'

'Christ.'

'It seems that Pollux left Troy last night.'

'Headed for the Greek camp?'

'Bestguess, sir.'

There was a long pause.

The St Matthew's Tie straightened himself to allow a little blood to flow down from his head.

'If you're right, Reeve, Odysseus will make his way Greekwards in the next few days too.'

'With Telemachus, do you think?'

Another long pause was followed by the sound of a folder being dropped on a desk.

The St Matthew's Tie stooped to do up another shoe-lace.

'Well, nothing to keep me in England now that Botham seems to have lost us the blasted Ashes. I'll fly over the moment anything develops.'

'Cricket not going too well then, sir?'

'The man's a bloody disgrace. He couldn't captain a paraplegic netball team.'

'Will you be around for initialling appropriation orders later in the afternoon, sir?'

'Well, young Reeve, after a brief luncherising and half an hour's memorandorising Cabinet, I'll be at Lord's.'

'Right, sir.'

'So if you want me to signatorise anything, send Simon Hesketh-Harvey round, he's a member. Now I must go and lavatorise. And while I'm away for God's sake try and learn to speak English.'

The St Matthew's Tie hurried along the corridor to his office. He heard the door of 3.4.CabCom opening. A voice hailed him.

'Ho there, young Hesketh-H!'

The St Matthew's Tie turned. A Bennett, Tovey and Steele Suit was standing in the corridor.

'Morning, sir.'

'Snap.'

They looked at each other's neck-ties with a smile.

'You may have to change that for the good old orange and yellow this pip emma,' said the Bennet, Tovey and Steele.

'Sir?'

'If you're a good boy, Reeve will send you over to me at Lord's this afternoon to watch the final death throes.'

'Good-o,' said the St Matthew's Tie. 'I shall enjoy that, sir.'

'Right. Oh, by the way– '

'Sir?'

'Prioritise. Ever come across that one?'

'Ugh!' said the St Matthew's Tie. 'Langley?'

'No, that arse Reeve, of course. Last week it was "having a meet-up with", God knows what new linguistic macedoine he's going to serve up next.'

'One shudders to think, sir.'

'All right then, Simon, off you pop.'





Eight

I

'I have taken much care in packing,' said Trefusis as he pushed shut the boot of the Wolseley. 'A tin of barley-sugar for you, Castrol GTX for the car, figgy oatcakes for me.'

'Figgy oatcakes?'

'Oatcakes are very healthy. Hotels, restaurants, cafés, they all take their toll. Salzburg is not kind to the figure. At my age travel broadens the behind. A stearopygous Trefusis is an unhappy Trefusis. The buns and tortes of Austria are whoreson binders of your whoreson stool. But a figgy oatcake laughs at constipation and favours rectal carcinoma with a haughty stare. In the grammar of health, while cream may hasten the full stop, porridge will ease the colon.'

'Oh, ah,' said Adrian. 'And curry creates the dash, I suppose.'

'Oh, I like that. Very good. "Curry creates the dash." Yes, indeed. Most. . . most. . . er, what is the word?'

'Amusing?'

'No . . . it'll come to me.'

The interior of the car smelt of Merton Park thrillers, Bakelite headsets and the Clothes Ration. It only needed the profile of Edgar Wallace or the voice of Edgar Lustgarten to sweep Adrian and Trefusis, with bells ringing, into a raincoat and Horlicks Britain of glistening pavements, trilbied police inspectors and poplin shirts. So familiar was the odour, so complete the vision it evoked as they swung with a whine of gears out of the college gates and onto the Trumpington Road, that Adrian could almost believe in reincarnation. He had never smelt that precise smell before, yet it was as known to him as the smell of his own socks.

Trefusis would not be drawn on the purpose of their mission to Salzburg.

'You knew that man who was killed then?'

'Knew him? No.'

'But Bob said...'

'I do hope the Bendix doesn't give out. The Wolseley 15/50 is a marvellous saloon, but the Bendix is most terribly susceptible to trouble.'

'Well if you didn't know him, how come you know his name?'

'I suppose one could call such an affliction bendicitis.'

'When I first arrived in Cambridge there was a rumour that you recruited for MI5. Either that or for the KGB.'

'My dear fellow, there is not a don over the age of sixty who is not said to be the fourth, fifth, sixth or seventh man in some improbable circle of spies, double agents and ruthless traitors.

'You should pay no attention.'

'You worked at Bletchley during the war though, didn't you? On the Enigma code.'

'So did Beryl Ayliffe the college librarian. Are we to believe that she is an MI5 . . . what's the word . . . operative?'

Adrian pictured the chain-smoking chatelaine of the St Matthew's library.

'Well no, of course not,' he conceded. 'But . . .'

'Ha, ha. More fool you, because she is!'

'What?'

'Or is she?' mused Trefusis. 'So damned difficult to tell in this damned deadly game we play. Anyway, what does it matter? Isn't it all the bloody same? Left, right? Right, wrong? The old distinctions don't matter any a damned damn any more, damn it.'

'All right, all right,' said Adrian, stung by the mockery. 'I grant you it all sounds a bit stupid. But we did see a man killed last year. You can't get away from that.'

'Assuredly.'

'And that's why we're going back to Salzburg?'

'I don't think we'll eat until we get to France. There's a surprisingly good restaurant at the railway station at Arras. See if you can find it on your map, there's a dear.'

II

Adrian had never eaten foiegras before.

'I thought it was just pate,' he said.

'Oh no, the pate is quite inferior. These are the livers themselves. Flash fried. I think you'll be pleased.'

Adrian was.

'It just literally melts in the mouth!' he exclaimed. 'Unbelievable!'

'You'll find the Corton Charlemagne an excellent accompaniment. Perfectly served at last. I have an ex-student who is likely to become the next editor of the Spectator. On his succession I shall offer for publication a little article on the iniquity of the British habit of over-chilling white Burgundies. If one's young friends are going to disgrace themselves by writing for such low periodicals the least they can do is assuage their guilt by providing a platform for advanced ideas. I make it a point to teach all my pupils to believe in properly served wine.'

Adrian listened with half an ear to the Professor's flow of conversation. A young man and woman had entered the restaurant a moment earlier and now floundered in the middle of the room, waiting for someone to show them to a table. Adrian's eyes narrowed suddenly. He leant across to Trefusis.

'Don't look now, but that couple behind you who've just come in . . .' He lowered his voice to a whisper. 'They were on the boat with us! I swear it's the same two. They were behind us in the car queue. In a green BMW.'

Trefusis tore a bread roll in half and looked speculatively into a large mirror over Adrian's shoulder.

'Really? Bless my soul, it's a small world and no mistake.'

'You don't think . . . you don't think they might be . . .following us?'

Trefusis raised his eyebrows. 'It's possible of course. It's always possible.'

Adrian grabbed Trefusis's arm across the table. 'I could go and, have a pee and put their car out of action. What do you say?'

'You think micturating over their car would put it out of action?'

'No, I mean pretend to have a pee but actually wrench out the rotor arm or take the distributor cap or whatever it is you do.'

Trefusis gazed at him with only the trace of a smile on his face. 'Do you know how they make foie gras?

'Donald, I'm serious. I'm sure they're following us.'

With a sigh, Trefusis put down the fragment of brioche he had been buttering.

'I'm serious too. It's time, young Healey, that you knew what this trip was all about.'

'Really?'

'Really. Now, I'll ask you again. Do you know how to make foie gras?'

Adrian stared at Trefusis. 'Er . . . no. No I don't.'

'Very well then, I'll tell you. You rear a goose from a puppy or calf or whatver a goose is when young.'

'Chick? Gosling?'

'Quite possibly. You take a young Strasbourg goose-cub, chick or gosling and you feed it rich grain in a mashy pulp.'

'Fatten it up, you mean?'

'That's right, but the mashy pulp is placed, you see, in a bag.'

'A bag?'

'That's right. A bag or sack. The bag or sack has some species of nozzle or protuberance at the narrow end, which is forced down the goose's gullet or throat. The bag or sack is then squeezed or compressed and the meal or fodder thus introduced or thrust into the creature or animal's crop or stomach.'

'Why not just let it feed normally?'

'Because this procedure is undertaken many times a day for the whole of the poor animal's life. It is force fed on a massive scale. Force fed until it is so gorged and gross that it can no longer move. Its liver becomes pulpy and distended. Ideal, in fact, for flash frying and presenting with a glass of spacious Montrachet or fat, buttery Corton Charlemagne.'

'That's horrific!' said Adrian. 'Why didn't you tell me that before?'

'I wanted you to taste it. It is one of the highest pleasures known to man. Wasn't it Sydney Smith who had a friend whose idea of heaven was eating it to the sound of trumpets? Like most of our highest pleasures, however, it is rooted in suffering; founded in an unnatural, almost perverted, process.'

Adrian's mind raced forward, trying to think of the relevance of this to their situation. He ran a storyline through his head. A European cartel of foie gras manufacturers, determined to prevent the Common Market from outlawing their product. Prepared to kill in order to protect what they saw as their God-given right to torture geese for the tables of the rich. Surely not? That sort to thing simply did not happen. And even if it did, it was scarcely the sort of affair in which Trefusis would interest himself.

'So what exactly . . .?'

'This forcing of a goose is an image I want you to hold in your head while I tell you of something else . . . ah . . . lepoisson est arrive.'

Trefusis beamed as two large dishes, each covered with an immense silver cloche, were set before them. The waiter looked from Adrian to Trefusis with an expectant smile and - now sure of their attention - he swept each cloche clear with a flourish, releasing clouds of delicately fishy steam.

Voilà! Bon appetit, messieurs/'

'Enlightening that what we call John Dory the French call Saint Pierre, the Italians San Pietro and the Spanish San Pedro.'

'Who was John Dory, do you think?'

'Oh, I imagine the Dory is from dore, gilded or golden. Of course we do sometimes call it St Peter's fish, I believe. Merci bien.'

'M'sieur!' The waiter bowed smartly and strutted away.

'Howsomever that may be,' said Trefusis. 'Some time ago I was contacted - I believe that's the right word? - by an old friend of mine, Tom Daly. Tom used to be the garden steward at St Matthew's and a fine gardener he was too, as green-fingered as . . . as . . .'

'As a Martian with septicaemia?'

'If that pleases you. It fell out that in nineteen-sixty-two Tom pleached, plashed and entwined himself with one Eileen Bishop. In due course he pollinated her and there sprung up a fine young son. In a simple but affecting ceremony in Little St Mary's later that year I agreed to renounce the world, the flesh and the devil in order to cleanse my soul in readiness for the task of standing sponsor to their freshly budded sprig, whom they had decided to baptise Christopher Donald Henry.'

'This gardener married and had a son and you are his godfather?'

'I believe that's what I said,' said Trefusis. 'Then in nineteen-seventy-six, to the distress of us all, Tom left the college to take up the post of chief borough gardener in West Norfolk. When next you admire the gay rampage of tulips at a roundabout in King's Lynn or the giddy riot of wayside lobelia in central Hunstanton, you'll know whom to thank. Be that as it may. Beyond the usual silver porringer at birth and the bi-annual five-pound note, my contribution to Christopher's moral welfare has been scant. I have to confess that Christopher, my godson, is a child of whom I stand rather in awe.'

Adrian tried to picture the Professor standing rather in awe of anything.

'The boy is remarkably gifted you see,' said Trefusis, gently laying a sliver of fish-bone on the side of his plate. 'His mathematical ability as an infant was simply astounding. From an early age he exhibited almost supernatural powers. He could multiply and divide long numbers in seconds, calculate square and cube roots in his head, do all the circus tricks. But he had a fine mind as well as an arithmetically prodigious brain and it was assumed that he would make his way to Trinity and contribute something to the field of pure mathematics before he was thirty or whatever age it is that marks the Anno Domini of mathematicians.'

'I believe they're pretty much over the hill by twenty-six these days,' said Adrian. 'How old is he now?'

'Eighteen or so. He is lucky, you might think, to have a father proud of his gifts and who, moreover, would have been happy for him to employ them academically, in the service of scholarship, for the sake of the pure art of pure mathematics. Many fathers of comparably modest incomes would have looked on a clever son as a route to riches. My son the financier, my son the barrister, my son the accountant. Tom stood quite ready and without rancour to explain the child away as my son the loopy mathematician with the scurfy hair and bottle-end spectacles.'

'And...?'

'Three years ago Christopher was awarded a scholarship to a public school in Suffolk: the money came from an organisation Tom Daly had never heard of. It now seems that this organisation is proposing to put Christopher through Cambridge. He will read not Pure Maths there, but Engineering. What is worrying Tom is that the organisation is only interested in Christopher because of his potential as a brain. After university they want him to go into industry.'

'What is the organisation?'

'I'll come to that. Tom believes that Christopher shouldn't be committed so early. He is frightened that this organisation is, in effect, buying his son. So he came to me and asked if I knew anything of them. I was able to confirm that I did. I have known of them for some time.'

'Who are they?'

'Let's settle up. I will tell you the rest on the road. What would be an adequate lagniappe, do you think?'

Adrian looked out of the rear window.

'They are following us!'

'How frustrating for them. All that power under their bonnet and they are forced to hold their pace down to our niggardly fifty-five miles per hour.'

As Trefusis spoke, the BMW moved out to the left and swept past them. Adrian caught a glimpse of the driver's face, alert and tense behind the wheel.

'The same man all right. British number plates. Right hand drive. GB sticker on the back. Why's he passed us, though?'

'Perhaps a relay,' said Trefusis, 'someone else will take up the pursuit. It is scarcely a problem to identify a car of this age and distinction.'

Adrian looked at him sharply. 'You admit that we're being followed then?'

'It was always a possibility.'

Adrian popped a lump of barley-sugar into his mouth. 'You were telling me about this organisation. That paid for your godson to go through school.'

'I have become increasingly aware in recent years,' said Trefusis, 'of what can only be called a conspiracy on a massive scale. I have watched the most talented, the most able and most promising students that come through St Matthew's and other colleges in Cambridge and other universities in England... I have watched them being bought up.'

'Bought up?'

'Purchased. Procured. Acquired. Gotten. Let us say an undergraduate arrives with phenomenal ability in, for example, English. A natural candidate for a doctorate, a teaching post, a life of scholarship or, failing those, a creative existence as poet, novelist or dramatist. He arrives full of just such ambitions and sparkling ideals but then . . . they get to him.'

'They?'

'Two years after graduation this first class mind is being paid eighty thousand pounds a year to devise advertising slogans for a proprietary brand of peanut butter or is writing snobbish articles in glossy magazines about exiled European monarchs and their children or some such catastrophic drivel. I see it year after year. Perhaps a chemist will arrive in the college. Great hopes are held out for his future. Nobel Prizes and who knows what else besides? He himself is full of the highest aspirations. Yet even before his final exams he has been locked and contracted into a job for life concocting synthetic pine-fresh biological soap powder fragrances for a detergent company. Adrian, someone is getting at our best minds! Someone is preventing them from achieving their full potential. This organisation I told you of is denying them a chance to grow and flourish. A university education should be broad and general. But these students are being trained, not educated. They are being stuffed like Strasbourg geese. Pappy mush is forced into them, just so one part of their brains can be fattened. Their whole minds are being ignored for the sake of that part of them which is marketable. Thus they have persuaded my godson Christopher to read Engineering instead of Mathematics.'

'How long has this been going on?'

'I cannot tell how long. Years, I suspect. I first began to take real notice fifteen or twenty years ago. But it is getting worse. More and more brilliant students are being diverted from work that could be of real benefit to mankind and their country. They are being battery farmed. Young Christopher Daly is just one of thousands.'

'My God!' said Adrian. 'You know who's behind this? We've got to stop them!'

'It's a conspiracy of industrialists, of certain highly placed economists and of members of governments of all political colours,' said Trefusis.

'But how can we prevent it? And what has it got to do with Salzburg?'

Trefusis looked across at Adrian, his eyes filled with grave concern. Suddenly he burst out laughing. Shaking his head from side to side, he snorted and struck the steering wheel. 'Oh Adrian, I am cruel! I'm wicked, naughty, dreadful and digraceful. Please forgive me.'

'What's so funny?'

'You silly, silly boy. What I have just described is the way the world works! It's not a conspiracy. It is called Modern Western Civilisation.'

'W-what do you mean?'

'Of course the best brains are lured into industry, advertising, journalism and the rest of it. Of course universities are adapting to the demands of commerce. It's regrettable and there's little we can do about it. But I think only a Marxist would call it an international conspiracy.'

'But you said an organisation . . . you told me that a specific organisation had offered that boy Christopher a scholarship.'

'The state, Adrian. A state scholarship. And the state will hope in return that he goes into something productive once he has obtained his degree. He will be incented by money, recruitment drives and the general thrust and tenor of the times. That is all.'

Adrian fumed in silence for a while.

'And this has nothing to do with what we're going to Salzburg for?'

'Nothing at all.'

'You are impossible, you know that?'

'Improbable perhaps, but not impossible. Besides, whilst what I described may not be a conscious intrigue, it is happening nonetheless and is vexatious in the extreme.'

'So you're still not going to tell me what we are in actual fact doing here?'

'All in actual good time,' said Trefusis. 'Now the Cardinal is getting thirsty; if memory has not fully quit her throne I believe there should be an amenable garage and routier in about eighty kilometres or so. In the meantime, we can tell each other the story of our lives.'

'All right,' said Adrian. 'You first. Tell me about Bletchley.'

'Little to tell. It was set up as a wartime decrypting station and filled up with mainly Cambridge personnel.'

'Why Cambridge?'

'The closest university town. At first they recruited philologists and linguists like myself.'

'This was when?'

'Nineteen-forty. Round about the time of the Battle of Britain.'

'And you were how old?'

'Tush and bibble! Is this then to be an interrogation? I was twenty-two.'

'Right. Just wondered.'

'Young and fizzing at the brim with ideals and theories about language. Now, who else was there with me? Dozens of girls who filed and clerked away with great brilliance and flair. The chess master Harry Golombek was on the team of course, and H.F.O. Alexander, also a magnificently dashing player. It was all rather cosy and fun at first, wrestling with enemy cyphers that had been intercepted all over Europe and Africa. It soon became clear, however, that the Enigma encryption device that German Naval Intelligence was using would need mathematicians to crack it. Acquaintanceship with the decryption techniques of the last war, the ability to do the Times crossword while shaving and a mastery of Russian verbs of motion were not enough any more. So they brought in Alan Turing, of whom you may have heard.'

Adrian had not.

'No? What a pity. Brilliant man. Quite brilliant, but very sad. Killed himself later. Many credit him with the invention of the digital computer. I can't quite remember how it came about. There was some pure mathematical problem which had faced the world of numbers for fifty years, I think, and he had solved it as a young man by positing the existence of a number-crunching machine. It was never his intention to build such a thing, it was merely hypothesised as a model to help solve an abstract difficulty. But unlike many mathematicians he relished the physical application of numbers. His hut in Bletchley was soon filled with rows and rows of valves. You remember valves? Tubes they call them in America. Little vacuum bulbs that glowed orange.'

'I remember,' said Adrian. 'It used to take television ages to warm up.'

'That's right. Well Alan had thousands of them all linked together in some impossibly complicated fashion. Got them from the Post Office.'

'The Post Office?'

'Yes, the GPO had been experimenting in electronics before the war and they seemed to be the only people who really knew about it. The clever thing about the Enigma machine was that, although it was purely mechanical, it changed daily and the number of permutations was so grotesquely huge that the old techniques of decryption wouldn't work. Alan cracked it quite brilliantly. But that was ony the first stage of course. He still needed to know the code before he could read the cypher.'

'What's the difference between a cypher and a code then?'

'Well, that is readily explained,' said Trefusis. 'Imagine a system in which a number refers to a letter of the alphabet. A equals one, B equals two, C equals three and so on, thus "Adrian" would be "One - four - eighteen - nine - one -fourteen", you understand?'

'Right...'

'That is a very basic form of cypher and a message written in it could be cracked by anyone of the meanest intelligence in seconds. But suppose that between us we two had personally prearranged that a word . . . "Biscuits", for example, was going to mean "nineteen-hundred hours", and that another word, for instance "Desmond", should signify "The Cafe Florian in St Mark's Square, Venice".'

'Got you . . .'

'I would then only have to signal to you: "Please send me some biscuits today, love Desmond," and you would know that I wanted to meet you at seven o'clock that evening at Florian's. That is a code and would be impossible to crack unless someone overheard us arranging it, or one of us was foolish enough to commit it to paper.'

'I see,' said Adrian. 'Then why not only use codes if they're uncrackable?'

'Unfortunately in wartime one needs to signal an enormous amount of unpredictable and detailed information. The receiver couldn't be expected to memorise thousands of different code words, and to write them down would be insecure. So it became practice to mix the two systems. A complicated cypher would be used which could only be cracked if one knew a key word, a code, which would change daily. That is how Enigma operated. So even when Enigma had been solved we needed Intelligence to help provide us with clues so that we could crack the daily code. That is where I came in, and of course, your old friend Humphrey Biffen.'

'Humphrey Biffen?'

'I believe he taught you French once.'

'Good Lord! Did Biffo work at Bletchley too?'

'Oh indeed. And Helen Sorrel-Cameron whom he later married. Guessing the daily key words was very much our speciality.'

'But however did you manage?'

'Well now, the Germans were so very confident that Enigma was uncrackable that they became remarkably sloppy about the assignation of the daily key. Intelligence furnished us with the names of operators and cypher clerks in German Naval Intelligence and Humphrey and I would make guesses. We used to keep immensely detailed files on each clerk: their likes, their loves, their families, mistresses, lovers, pets, tastes in music and food . . . oh, everything. Each day we would try out different ideas, the name of that particular operator's dog, their favourite kind of pastry, their maiden surname, that sort of thing. We usually got there in the end.'

'But the Germans must have discovered that you had cracked it, surely?'

'Well that's the peculiarity of this kind of work. Our job was simply to furnish Military Intelligence with everything we decrypted. They would then, as a rule, fail to act upon it.'

'Why?'

'Because they could on no account let the enemy know that they were reading their most secret transmissions. It is generally believed, for instance, that Churchill had prior warning of the impending Luftwaffe raid on Coventry but neglected to tell the army and air force for fear of extra defences in the area revealing to the Germans that it had been known about in advance. This is not strictly true, but it demonstrates the principle. Some believe, of course, that Admiral Kanaris, the head of German Naval Intelligence, was perfectly well aware that we were reading Enigma all along, but that he was so pro-British and distressed at the behaviour of the Fuhrer that he simply let it happen.'

'Fascinating,' said Adrian. 'God I wish I could have been around at a time like that.'

'Oh, I don't know,' said Trefusis. 'I think you might have been bored.'

Trefusis peered at the landscape and the road-signs. 'Still another fifty or so kilometres before our service station. Now it's your turn. What has happened in your young life? Plenty, I make no doubt.'

'Oh not so much,' said Adrian. 'I was arrested for the possession of cocaine once.'

'Really?'

'Yes. I had been living with an actor after a few months of being a rent-boy.'

'A rent-boy?' said Trefusis. 'How enterprising! And possession of cocaine? Were you imprisoned?'

'Well first I should tell you how I was expelled from school. That should take us twenty kilometres. Then I'll tell you what happened after that.'





Nine

I

He had stared at the first paper for the whole three hours, unable to write a thing. One of the girls came up to him afterwards.

'I saw you, Adrian Healey! Couldn't you answer any of the questions, then?'

Two years in this stupid college that called its pupils 'students' and its lessons 'lectures'. How had he stood it? He should never have given way.

'I think it's the right thing, darling. It'll give you so much more independence than a school. Father agrees. You can get the bus in to Gloucester and be home with me every night. And then after you've got the "A" levels, you can sit the Cambridge entrance. Everyone says it's an awfully good college. The Fawcetts' boy – David is it? – he went there after he was . . .after he left Harrow, so I'm sure it's all right.'

'What you mean is, it's the only place for miles around that'll take boys that've been expelled.'

'Darling, that's not . . .'

'Anyway, I don't want "A" levels and I don't want to go to Cambridge.'

'Ade, of course you do! Just think how you'd regret it if you missed the opportunity.'

He had missed the opportunity, and the lectures. Instead there had been the ABC cinema and the Star Cafe, where he played pin-ball and three-card brag.

Discuss Lawrence's use of external landscape in relation to the internal drama of Sons and Lovers.

Only connect . . . How are the Schlegels and Wilcoxes connected in Howards End?

Compare and contrast the different uses of landscape and nature in the poetry of Seamus Heaney and Ted Hughes.

Suddenly his plausible wit was of no use to him. Suddenly the world was dull and sticky and unkind. His future was behind him and he had nothing to look forward to but the past.

Goodbye Gloucester, goodbye Stroud. He was at least following a literary example. When Laurie Lee had walked out on his midsummer's morning he had had a guitar and the blessings of his family to accompany him. Adrian had a paperback copy of Anouilh's Antigone, which he had intended to read at lunchtime as some kind of feeble preparation for the afternoon's French literature paper, and fifteen pounds from his mother's handbag.

In the end he got a lift from a lorry driver who was going all the way to Stanmore.

'I can drop you somewhere on the North Circular, if you like.'

Thanks.'

North Circular ... North Circular. It was some kind of road, wasn't it?

'Er . . . is the North Circular anywhere near Highgate?'

'You can catch a bus from Golder's Green pretty quick.'

Bollocks lived in Highgate. He might be able to cadge a couple of nights there while he sorted himself out.

'I'm Jack, by the way,' said the driver.

'Er . . . Bullock, Hugo Bullock.'

'Bullock? That's a funny one.'

'I once met a girl called Jane Heffer. We should've got married.'

'Yeah? What went wrong?'

'No, I mean her being called Heffer. It's the female of bullock.'

'Oh right, right.'

They drove on in silence. Adrian offered Jack a cigarette.

'No thanks, mate. Trying to give 'em up. Don't do you any good in this game.'

'No, I suppose not.'

'So, what, you running away then, are you?'

'Running away?'

'Yeah. How old are you?'

'Eighteen.'

'Get away!'

'Well, I will be.'

Bullock's mother stood in the doorway and eyed him suspiciously. He supposed his hair was rather long.

'I'm a friend of William's. From school.'

'He's in Australia. It's his year off before going to Oxford.'

'Oh yes, of course. I just . . . wondered, you know. Not to worry. Happened to be passing.'

'I'll tell him you called if he rings. Are you staying in London?'

'Yes, in Piccadilly.'

'Piccadilly?'

What was wrong with that?

'Well, you know, more just off.'

The pin-ball machines in Piccadilly had more sensitive tilt mechanisms than those he was used to in Gloucester, and he wasn't getting many replays. At this rate he wouldn't be able to afford to carry on for more than an hour.

A man in a blue suit came down behind him and put down a fifty-pence piece.

'It's yours,' said Adrian, smacking the flipper buttons in frustration as his last silver ball rolled out of play. 'That was my last. I just can't seem to get the hang of the bloody thing.'

'No, no, no,' said the man in the blue suit, 'the fifty is for you. Have another go.'

Adrian turned in surprise.

'Well, that's awfully kind . . . are you sure?'

'Yes indeed.'

The fifty was soon used up.

'Come and have a drink,' said the man. 'I know a bar just round the corner.'

They left the chimes and buzzes and intense, haunted concentration of the amusement arcade and walked up Old Compton Street and into a small pub in a side street. The barman didn't question Adrian's age, which was an unusual relief.

'Haven't seen you before. Always good to meet a new face. Yes, indeed.'

'I'd've thought everyone was a stranger in London,' said Adrian. 'I mean, it's mostly tourists round here, isn't it?'

'Oh, I don't know,' said the man. 'You'd be surprised. It's a village really.'

'Do you often play pin-ball?'

'Me? No. Got an office up the Charing Cross Road. I just like to look in most evenings on my way home. Yes, indeed.'

'Right.'

'I thought you were a girl at first with your hair and . . .everything.'

Adrian blushed. He didn't like to be reminded how long beard growth was in coming.

'No offence. I like it... it suits you.'

'Thanks'

'Yes indeed. Yes indeedy-do.'

Adrian made a note, somewhere in the back of his mind, to get a haircut the next day.

'You sound a bit public school to me. Am I right?'

Adrian nodded.

'Harrow,' he said. He thought it a safe bet.

'Harrow, you say? Harrow! Dear me, I think you're going to be a bit of a hit. Yes indeed. You got anywhere to stay?'

'Well . . .'

'You can put up with me, if you like. It's just a small flat in Brewer Street, but it's local.'

'It's terribly kind of you . . . I'm looking for a job, you see.'

That's how simple it had been. One day a lazy student, the next a busy prostitute.

'Thing is, Hugo,' said Don, 'soon as I clapped eyes on you I thought, "That's not rent, that's the real thing." I've been around the Dilly for fifteen years and I can spot 'em, indeedy-dumplings, I can. Now I'm sorry to say that I won't fancy you next week. Unplucked chicken is my speciality and I'll be bored stiff with you Thursday. Bored limp, more like. Hur, hur! But you cut your hair a bit - not too much - keep your Harrovian accent fit and you'll be clearing two ton a week. Yes indeed.'

'Two ton?'

'Two hundred, sunshine.'

'But what do I have to do?'

And Don told him. There were two principal amusement arcades, there was the Meat Rack, which was an iron pedestrian grille outside Play land, the more active of the arcades, and there was the Piccadilly Underground itself.

'But you want to watch that. Crawling with the law.'

Don wasn't a pimp. He worked at a perfectly respectable music publishing house in Denmark Street. Adrian paid him thirty pounds a week which covered his own accommodation and the use of the flat for tricks during the day. At night it was up to the tricks to provide the venue.

'Just don't start chewing gum, shooting horse or looking streetwise, that's all.'

At first the days passed slowly, each transaction nerve-racking and remarkable, but soon the quiet pulse of routine quickened the days. The young can become accustomed to the greatest drudgeries, like potato-harvesting or schoolwork, with surprising speed. Prostitution had at least the advantage of variety.

Adrian got on pretty well with the other rent-boys. Most of them were tougher and beefier than he was, skinheads with tattoos, braces and mean looks. They didn't regard him as direct competition and sometimes they even recommended him.

'Do you know of anyone less . . . chunky?' a punter might ask.

'You want to try Hugo, he'll be doing the Times crossword down the Bar Italia this time of the morning. Flared jumbo cords and a blazer. Can't miss him.'

Adrian was intrigued by the fact that the most prosperous, pin-striped clients went for the rough trade, while the wilder, less respectable tricks wanted more lightly muscled boys like him. Opposite poles attracted. The Jacobs wanted hairy men and the Esaus wanted smooth. It meant that he more than most had to learn to spot the sadists and nutters who were on the lookout for a sex-slave. One of the last things Adrian wanted was to be chained up, flogged and urinated over.

He liked to think that his rates were competitive but not insulting. A blow-job was ten quid to give, fifteen to receive. After a week he made up his mind to forbid anything up the anus. Some could take it and some couldn't: Adrian decided that he belonged to the latter category. A couple of boys tried to convince him, as he hobbled down Coventry Street after a particularly heavy night complaining that his back passage felt like a windsock, that he would soon get used to it, but he resolved - financially disadvantageous as it might be - that his rear section was to be firmly labelled a no-poking compartment. This was a proviso he had to make clear to clients at the opening of negotiations: between the thighs was fine - the intercrural method was, after all, endorsed by no less an authoritative source than the Ancient Greeks themselves - but he was buggered if he was going to be buggered. As long as he could get it up he didn't mind sodomising a client, but his own bronze eye was closed to all comers.

When business was slack he and some of the others would mix with the journalists and professional Soho drinkers in the French House in Dean Street. Gaston, the implausibly named landlord, had no objection to their presence so long as they didn't tout for custom there. The Golden Lion next door was for that. The regulars however - embittered painters and poets for whom the seventies were an unwelcome vacuum to be filled with vodka and argument - could be savagely impolite.

'We don't need your kind of filth in here,' a radio producer, whose watery seed Adrian had spat out only the previous night, shouted one afternoon. 'Get the fuck out!'

'How ill-bred!' Adrian had exclaimed as Gaston ejected the radio producer instead.

Like Adrian, most of the boys were self-employed; one or two had ponces, but in general pimping was a feature of the more highly structured sister profession of female prostitution. The boys were free to come and go as they pleased, no one was going to tell them where they could set up their stall, no one was going to take a cut of their hard-earned cash. The cash did come in at a pleasing rate but Adrian found he had little to spend it on. Drink didn't really appeal to him much and he was too afraid of drugs to be tempted to take so much as a single pill or a single puff of anything illegal. Every day he would walk to the post office behind St Martin's-in-the-Field and deposit his earnings into an account he had opened under the name of Hugo Bullock. It was all building up rather nicely.

Chickens worried him, though. These were the children of eleven, twelve and thirteen. Some were even younger. Adrian was no Mother Teresa and far too much of a coward to beg them to go home. They were tougher than he was and would have told him to get lost anyway. Besides, they had left their homes because life there was worse, in their eyes at least, than life on the streets. If there was one thing those children knew, it was where and when they were unhappy: there was no cloud of morality obscuring the clarity of their states of mind. They weren't popular with the majority of rent-boys, however, because they attracted television documentaries, clean-up campaigns and police attention, all of which interfered with and militated against the free flow of trade. Their customers, known not unnaturally as chickenhawks, were more nervous and cautious than Adrian's brand of client, so the chickens would have to do much more of the running than he could ever have dared to do. They would spot when they were being eyed up and step boldly forward.

'Lend us ten p for the machine, mister.'

'Oh, yes. Right. There you are.'

'Second thoughts, Dad, let's go away from here.'

It was unsettling to think of them being the same age as Cartwright. Cartwright would be sixteen going on seventeen now of course, but the Cartwright he would always know was thirteen going on fourteen. The chickens leant up against the Meat Rack pushing their tightly denimed bums against the rails when, if only the stork had dropped them down a different chimney, they could have been clothed in white flannels, driving the ball past extra cover for four runs or wrestling with ablative absolutes in panelled classrooms. If there was an accurate means of measuring happiness, with electrodes or chemicals, Adrian wondered if the schoolboy would prove to be happier than the rent-boy. Would he feel less exploited, less shat upon? Adrian himself felt freer than he ever had, but he had never been sure that he was representative.

After three weeks he decided to take advantage of his flexible hours and spend five days at Lord's watching Thompson and Lillee tear the heart out of the English batting in the second Test. He arrived at the Grace Gate early and walked round to the back to see if he could get a glimpse of the players warming up in the nets.

As he made his way past the Stewards' Offices and the members' stands he thought he caught a glimpse of a familiar figure striding towards him. He turned and started to walk in the opposite direction.

'Adrian! My God, Adrian!'

He quickened his step, but found himself blocked by the incoming tide of spectators.

'Adrian!'

'Oh, hello, Uncle David.' Adrian smiled weakly up into the thunderous face of his mother's brother.

'Where the hell have you been this last month?'

'Oh, you know . . .'

'Have you been in touch with your mother and father yet?'

'Well... I have been meaning to write.'

Uncle David grabbed him by the arm.

'You come along with me, young man. Sick with worry your mother's been. Sick. HOW you could have dared . . .'

Adrian had the lowering experience of being publicly dragged into the MCC offices like an errant schoolboy, which he supposed was by and large what he was.

'Morning, David, caught a yobbo have you?' someone called as he was pulled up the steps.

'I certainly have!'

They bumped into a tall blond man in a blazer coming the other way who smiled at them.

'Morning, Sir David,' he said.

'Morning, Tony, best of luck.'

'Thanks,' said the tall man and walked on. Adrian stopped dead as it suddenly dawned on him who it had been.

'That was Tony Greig!'

'Well who did you expect to see here, you idiot? Ilie Nastase? This way.'

They had reached a small office whose walls were covered with prints of heroes from the Golden Age of cricket. Uncle David closed the door and pushed Adrian into a chair.

'Now then. Tell me where you are living.'

'Muswell Hill.'

'Address?'

'Fourteen Endicott Gardens.'

'Whose house is that?'

'It's a bed and breakfast place.'

'Do you have a job?'

Adrian nodded.

'Where?'

'I'm working in the West End.' The 'in' was redundant, but Uncle David was unlikely to be impressed by the truth.

'Doing what?'

'It's a theatrical agency in Denmark Street. I make the coffee, that kind of thing.'

'Right. There's a pen, there's paper. I want you to write down the address in Muswell Hill and the address in Denmark Street. Then you are to write a letter to your parents. Have you any idea what you've put them through? They went to the police, for God's sake! What the hell was it all about, Adrian?'

Here he was in another study, in another chair, facing another angry man and being asked another set of impossible questions. 'Why do you do this sort of thing?' 'Why can't you concentrate?' 'Why can't you behave like everyone else?' 'What's the matter with you?'

Adrian knew that if he answered 'I don't know' in a sulky voice, Uncle David would, like dozens before him, snort and bang the table and shout back, 'What do you mean, you don't know? You must know. Answer me!'

Adrian stared at the carpet.

'Well?' asked Uncle David.

'I don't know,' Adrian said sulkily.

'What do you mean, you don't know? You must know. Answer me!'

'I was unhappy.'

'Unhappy? Well why couldn't you have told someone? Can you imagine how your mother felt when you didn't come home? When no one knew where you were? That's unhappy for you. Can you imagine it? No, of course you can't.'

Beyond a pewter mug at his Christening, a Bible at his Confirmation, a copy of Wisden every birthday and regular bluff shoulder-clapping and by-Christ-you've-grown-ing, Uncle David hadn't taken his sponsorial duties to Adrian with any spectacular seriousness, and it was unsettling to see him now glaring and breathing heavily down his nostrils as if he had been personally affronted by his godson's flight. Adrian didn't think he'd earned the right to look that angry.

'I just felt I had to get away.'

'I dare say. But to be so underhand, so ... sly. To sneak away without saying a word. That was the act of a coward and a rotter. You'll write that letter.'

Uncle David left the room, locking the door behind him. Adrian sighed and turned to the desk. He noticed a silver letter-opener on the desk in the shape of a cricket bat. He held it to the light and saw the engraved signature of Donald Bradman running obliquely across the splice. Adrian slipped it into the inside pocket of his blazer and settled down to write.

Under a Portrait of Prince Ranjitsinhji,

A funny little office near the Long Room,

Lord's Cricket Ground, June 1975



Dear Mother and Father,



I'm so sorry I ran away without saying goodbye. Uncle David tells me that you have been worrying about me, not too much I hope.



I'm living in a Bed and Breakfast place in 14 Endicott Gardens, Highgate, and I have a job in a theatrical agency called Leon Bright's, 59 Denmark Street, WC2. I'm a sort of messenger and office-boy, but it's a good job and I hope to rent a flat soon.



I am well and happy and truly sorry if I have upset you. I will write soon and at length to explain why I felt I had to leave. Please try and forgive



Your doting son



Adrian



PS I met the new England Captain, Tony Greig, today.





Twenty minutes later, Uncle David returned and read it through.

'I suppose that will do. Leave it with me and I'll see that it's posted.'

He looked Adrian up and down.

'If you looked halfway decent I'd invite you to watch from the Members' Stand.'

'That's all right.'

'Come tomorrow wearing a tie and I'll see what I can do.'

'That's awfully kind. I'd love to.'

'They give you days off to watch cricket, do they? From this place in Denmark Street? Just like that?'

'Like the Foreign Office, you mean?'

'Fair point, you cheeky little rat. And get your hair cut. You look like a tart.'

'Heavens! Do I?'

Adrian did not return to Lord's the next day, nor any of the other days. Instead he had gone back to work and found time to hang around the Tottenham Court Road catching Tony Greig's ninety-six and Lillee's maddening seventy-three on the banks of televisions in the electrical appliance shop windows.

The risk of meeting people he knew was acute. He remem- bered how Dr Watson in the first Sherlock Holmes story had described Piccadilly Circus as a great cesspool into which every idler and lounger of the Empire was irresistibly drained. It seemed now that as the Empire had dwindled in size, so the strength of the Circus's pull had grown. Britain was a draining bath and Piccadilly, its plug-hole, now seemed almost audibly to gurgle as it sucked in the last few gallons of waste.

It was part of Adrian's job, in the centre of the whirlpool, to scrutinise every face that eddied past. Innocent passers-by tended not to meet the glances of strangers, so he usually found himself able to turn away in time if there was someone he knew in the area.

One rainy afternoon, however, about a fortnight after the meeting with his Uncle David, while sheltering in a favourite pitch under the columns of Swan and Edgar, touting for business, he caught sight of Dr Meddlar, without his dog collar but unmistakable nevertheless, coming up the steps from the Underground.

Term must be over, Adrian thought as he concealed himself behind a pillar.

He watched Meddlar look left and right before crossing over to Boots the Chemists under the neon signs. Greg and Mark, a couple of skinheads that Adrian knew, were going about their unlawful business there, and he was amazed to see Meddlar stop and talk to one of them. He was trying to look casual, but to Adrian's knowing eye it was perfectly clear that formal discussions were taking place.

Hopping through the traffic, Adrian approached from behind.

'Why, Dr Meddlar!' he cried, slapping him bonhomously on the back.

Meddlar spun round.

'Healey!'

'My dear old Chaplain, how simply splendid to see you!' Adrian shook him warmly by the hand. 'But let me give you a piece of advice - verb sap as we used to say at the dear old school - if they're asking more than a tenner for you to suck their cocks, you're being ripped off.'

Meddlar went white and stepped backwards off the kerb.

'You're leaving?' Adrian was disappointed. 'Oh, if you must. But any time you're in need of rough sex let me know and I'll fix you up with something. But as the man said in Casablanca, "Beware, there are vultures everywhere. Everywhere, vultures.'"

Meddlar disappeared into a mess of spray and car horns.

'Remember the Green Cross Code,' Adrian called after him. 'Because I won't be there when you cross the road.'

The skinheads were not pleased.

'You bastard, Hugo! We were about to score.'

'I'll pay you in full, my dears,' said Adrian. 'It was worth it. Meanwhile let me stand you both a Fanta in the Wimpy. There's no action going on in this bloody rain.'

They sat by the window, automatically scanning the crowds that blurred past.

'Why did he call you "Healey"?' asked Greg. 'I thought your name was Bullock?'

'Healey was my nickname,' said Adrian. 'I used to do impressions of Denis Healey the politician, you see. It sort of stuck.'

'Oh.'

'What a silly billy,' Adrian added, by way of proof.

'That's just like him!'

'Well, it's just like Mike Yarwood anyway.'

'And that guy really was a vicar?'

'School Chaplain, on my life.'

'Bloody hell. He was asking Terry and me if we'd tie him up. And him a bleeding Collar.'

'"I struck the board and cried No More!" said Adrian, folding his hands in prayer.

'You what?'

'George Herbert. A poem called "The Collar". It must have passed you by somehow. "Have I no garlands gay? All blasted? All wasted? Not so my heart: but there is fruit, and thou hast hands."'

'Oh. Right. Yeah.'

'You were the garlands gay, the fruit. And his hands were about to lay themselves on you, I suspect. He must have forgotten how it ends. "At every word, Methought I heard one calling, Child! And I replied, My Lord."'

'You don't half rabbit, do you?'

'It's a splendid poem, you'd love it. I can sprint down to Hatchards and buy a copy if you'd like.'

'Fuck off.'

'Yes, well, there is that side to it too, of course,' Adrian conceded. 'Now, if you'll forgive me, I've got to nip next door to Boots and get myself some more lotion for the old crabs.'

About two months later he was picked up by an actor.

'I know you,' Adrian said, as they sat back in the taxi.

The actor took off his sunglasses.

'Christ!'Adrian giggled.'You're - '

'Just call me Guy,' said the actor. 'It's my real name.'

A famous trick! Adrian thought to himself. I've turned a famous trick!

He stayed the night, something he had been warned against. Guy had woken him up with smoked salmon and scrambled eggs and a kiss.

'I couldn't believe you were trade, honey,' he said. 'I saw you walk from Playland to the Dilly and I couldn't fucking believe it.'

'Oh well,' said Adrian modestly, 'I haven't been at it long.'

'And Hugo, too! My favourite name. It's always been my favourite name.'

'One does one's best.'

'Will you stay with me, Hugo baby?'

The invitation couldn't have come at a better time for Adrian. Three days before he had caught sight of himself in the mirror of the Regent Palace Hotel cloakroom and been shocked to see the face of a whore looking back at him.

He didn't know how or why he had changed, but he had. Only the tiniest amount of bumfluff grew on his chin and when he shaved it off he was still as smooth as a ten-year-old. His hair was shorter, but not coiffured or poncey. His jeans were tight, but no tighter than any student's. Yet the face had screamed 'Rent'.

He smiled engagingly at the mirror. A cheap invitation leered back.

He raised his eyebrows and tried a lost, innocent look.

Fifteen quid for a blow-job. Nothing up the arse, his reflection replied.

A couple of weeks out of the Dilly would give him a chance to bring back some of the peaches and cream.

Guy lived in a small house in Chelsea and was about to start shooting a film at Shepperton Studios. He had been cruising Piccadilly for a last treat before throwing himself into five weeks of rising at six and working till eight.

'But now I've got a friend to come home to. It's wonderful, honey, wonderful!'

Adrian thought that to have someone to answer the telephone, do the shopping and keep the place tidy for him was indeed wonderful.

'I had an Irish cleaner once, but the bitch threatened to go to the press, so I don't trust anyone to come in now. I trust you, though, cutie-pie.' i The public school accent. If only they knew.

'I may be right, I may be wrong,' he sang to himself in the shower, 'But I'm perfectly willing to swear, That when you turned and smiled at me, A prostitute wept in Soho Square.'

So Adrian stayed and learnt how to cook and shop and be charming at dinner parties. Guy's friends were mostly producers and writers and actors, only a few of them gay. Adrian was the only one who called him Guy, which added a special and publicly endearing touch to the friendship. Guy was thirty-five and had been married at the age of nineteen. The child from this marriage lived with the ex-wife, an actress who had taken Guy's announcement of homosexuality very badly, instantly remarrying and denying Guy any access to his son.

'He must be about your age now, couple of years younger perhaps. I bet he's a screaming madam. It would serve the bitch right.'

One evening Guy's agent, Michael Morahan, and his wife Angela came to dinner. They arrived before Guy had returned from Shepperton so Adrian did his best to entertain them in the kitchen where he was chopping peppers.

'We've heard a lot about you,' said Angela, dropping her ocelot stole onto the kitchen table.

'Golden opinions, I trust?'

'Oh yes, you've done Tony nothing but good.'

Michael Morahan opened a bottle of wine.

'That's a seventy-four,' said Adrian. 'It'll need to be decanted or at least breathe for an hour. There's a Sancerre in the fridge if you'd rather.'

'Thank you, this will be fine,' was the blunt reply. 'I understand from Tony that you're an O.H. ?'

Adrian had already noticed the Old Harrovian tie around Morahan's neck and had his answer prepared.

'Well, to tell you the truth,' he said, 'that's a rumour that I sort of allowed to get around. Security,' he said, tapping the side of his nose. 'I may as well tell you that Hugo Bullock isn't my real name either.'

Morahan stared unpleasantly.

'So. A mystery man from nowhere. Does Tony know that?'

'Oh dear, do you think he should?'

'I'm sure not,' said Angela. 'Anyone can tell you're trustworthy.'

They went through to the sitting room, Adrian wiping his hands on a blue-and-white-striped butcher's apron he liked to wear when cooking.

'I have to look after him, you see,' said Morahan. 'Under age and anonymous is worrying.'

'I'll be eighteen in a couple of weeks.'

'You'll still be under age by three years. A man's career can be ruined. It nearly happened last year.'

'It wouldn't exactly do my career any good either, would it? So we're in a position of mutual trust, I'd've thought.'

'What do you have to lose exactly?'

'The bubble, reputation.'

'Really?'

'Yes, really.'

Angela intervened.

'It's just that we have to be sure . . . I'm sure you understand, Hugo darling ... we have to be sure that you're not going to . . . to hurt Tony.'

'But why on earth should I?'

'Oh come on, man!' Morahan snorted. 'You know what we're saying.'

'You're saying that Guy, who is thirty-five years old, rich, famous and experienced in the ways of the world, is a poor trusting innocent to be protected and I, half his age, am a corrupting devil who might hurt him? Blackmail him, I suppose is what you mean.'

'I'm sure Michael never meant that . . .'

'I shall go to the kitchen and crush a garlic'

Angela followed him in.

'It's his job, Hugo. You must understand.'

It might have been the garlic and the onions that he was chopping, it might have been anger, it might have been nothing more than performance - because it seemed dramatically the right thing to do under the circumstances - but for whatever reason, tears were in Adrian's eyes. He wiped them away. 'I'm sorry, Angela.'

'Darling, don't be ridiculous. Everything's going to be fine. Michael just wanted to . . . find me a cigarette would you? . . . he just wanted to be sure.'

They heard Guy coming up the stairs.

'Yoo-hoo, honey-bear! Daddy's home.'

Adrian winced at the language. Angela squeezed his arm.

'You love him, don't you, darling?' she whispered.

Adrian nodded. He might as well have this awful woman on his side.

'Everything's going to be fine,' she said, kissing him on the cheek.

Adrian displayed just the right kind of affection towards Guy over dinner. Not whorish, but adoring; not clinging or possessive, but happy and trusting. Michael and Angela went away full of praise for his cooking, his wit and his discretion.

Guy was very touched. He nuzzled up to Adrian on the sofa.

'You're my very special puppy and I don't deserve you. You're magical and wonderful and you're never to leave.'

'Never?'

'Never.'

'What about when I'm fat and hairy?'

'Don't be a silly baby. Come bye-byes with Guy-Guy.'

On the evening before his last day of filming, Guy asked Adrian to take an envelope to a house in Battersea and bring back the reply. Zak, the man to whom he was to deliver the envelope, would be expecting him, but he was a famous Dutch pop-star, shy of publicity, so Adrian shouldn't be surprised if he behaved oddly.

Adrian couldn't think of any Dutch pop-stars who needed to be shy of publicity in South London, but Guy's manner and lack of soupy terms of endearment suggested that this was a serious business, so he said nothing and next morning went happily on his way.

Zak was friendly enough.

'Boyfriend of Tony? Hi, good to meet you. You got something for me?'

Adrian handed him the envelope.

'Guy ... I mean Tony . . . said there'd be a reply.'

'A reply? Sure, I've got a reply. You wait here one moment.'

The envelope containing the reply was sealed and Adrian walked back over Chelsea Bridge, debating with himself whether or not to steam it open and read it when he got back to the house. He decided against it. Guy trusted him and it would be exhilarating to be so honest for a change. Instead he pulled out his copy of Antigone and read as he walked. It was something of a pose, he liked the idea of being seen reading a book in French, but he also wanted to keep fluent. It always caused a sensation in the Dilly when he was able to give directions to French tourists or, indeed, to do business with them.

He reached the King's Road and turned left. There was some kind of a scuffle going on outside the King's Tavern. A group of glue-sniffers was fighting with spray cans. One of them sprayed red paint over Adrian as he tried to hurry past.

'Oh, look what you've done!' he cried.

'Oh, look what you've done!' they shouted back, mimicking his accent. 'Fuck off, arsehole.'

They were not in a mood to be spoken to, so Adrian moved smartly away. But they decided to abandon their game and give chase.

Oh shit, Adrian thought to himself, as he ran into Bywater Street. Why did I say anything at all? You idiot, Adrian! You're going to get twenty types of crap beaten out of you now. He could hear them catching up with him. But then ... joy of joys! He heard the wee-waa, wee-waa of a police car drawing up.

Two of the kids scattered, with an officer sprinting after them. But the other three were pushed against a wall and searched.

'Thank God,' panted Adrian.

'Against that wall,' said a sergeant.

'Sorry?'

'Against that wall.'

'But I'm the one they were chasing!'

'You heard me.'

Adrian spread his legs against the wall and assumed the position.

'What's this?'

'What's what?' said Adrian. All he could see was a brick wall.

'This,' said the policeman, turning him round and holding up an envelope.

'Oh, it's a message. Belongs to a friend of mine. It's private.'

'A message?'

'That's right.'

The policeman ripped the envelope open and pulled out a polythene sachet of white powder.

'Funny kind of message.'

'What is it?' asked Adrian.

The policeman opened the sachet and dipped a finger into the powder.

'Well, flower,' he said as he sucked the finger, 'I'd say it was two years. Two years easy.'

*

A table, two chairs, a door that squeaked, cigarette smoke, no window, yellowing gloss paint, the distant murmur of the King's Road, the unblinking brown eyes of Detective Sergeant Canter of the Drug Squad.

'Look, you say it's not yours. You were delivering it for a friend. You've never used the stuff yourself. You didn't even know what it was. Frankly, Hugo, I believe you. But if you don't tell us the name of this friend, then I'm sorry to say that you'll be drowning in a bucket of hot shit without a life-belt.'

'But I can't, I really can't. It would ruin him.'

'It's not going to do you a lot of good, either, is it?'

Adrian clutched his head in his hands. Canter was friendly, amused, indifferent and tenacious.

'I've got to think up a charge, you see. What can I choose? There's possession. Let me see . . . how much was it? Seven grammes of Charlie ... bit dodgy, that. Rather a lot for personal use. But first offence, you're young. Reckon we could get away with six months DC.'

'DC?'

'Detention Centre, Hugo. Not nice, but quick. Short sharp shock. Then there's possession with intent to supply. You're looking at two years straight away, now. Then we have to think about trafficking. They throw away the key for that one.'

'But. . .'

'The thing is, Hugo, I've got a problem here you have to help me with. You've already told me that you don't take it yourself, so I can't really charge you with possession, can I? If you don't powder your own nose, you must have been intending to flog it to someone else. Stands to reason.'

'But he wasn't paying me! It was just an errand, I didn't know what it was.'

'Mm.' Sergeant Canter looked down at his notes. 'Rather a lot of cash in your post-office account, isn't there? Where's all that from, then?'

'That's mine! I've . . . I've saved it. I've never had anything to do with drugs. I promise!'

'But I look down at my notes and I don't see any names. All I see is "Hugo Bullock nicked in possession of a quarter ounce of best Bolivian Marching Powder." No one else for my charge-sheet. Just Hugo Bullock. I need the name of the man you collected it from and I need the name of your friend, don't I?'

Adrian shook his head.

The detective sergeant patted him on the shoulder.

'Lover is he?'

Adrian blushed.

'He's just... a friend.'

'Yeah. That's right. Yeah. How old are you, Hugo?'

'Eighteen next week.'

'There you go. I think I better have his name, don't you? He corrupts a nice well-brought-up young kid and he sends him to pick up his cocaine for him. The court will weep big tears for you, my son. Probation and sympathy.'

Adrian stared down at the table.

'The other man,' he said. 'The man I got it off. I'll give you his name.'

'Well, that's a start.'

'But he mustn't know that I told you.'

He had a sudden vision of a Godfather-like revenge being wreaked against him. Adrian, the man who grassed, beaten to a pulp in a prison, a brown-paper parcel of two dead fishes sent to his parents.

'I mean he won't ever know, will he? I won't have to give evidence against him or anything?'

'Calm down, Hugo, old lad. If he's a dealer we put him under surveillance and we catch him in the act. Your name never comes into it.'

Sergeant Canter leant forward, gently raised Adrian's chin with a finger, and looked into his eyes.

'That's a promise, Hugo. Believe me.'

Adrian nodded.

'But you'd better start talking quick. Your boyfriend is going to be wondering where you are by now. We don't want him to call his dealer friend up on the blower, do we?'

'No.' ,

'No. He'll be out of it quick as shit off a shovel and then Hugo Bullock will still be the only name on my list.'

'He . . . my friend won't miss me until the evening.'

'I see, what's his job?'

'Look, I said. I'm only going to tell you about the other man.'

'My pencil is poised, Hugo.'

After Adrian had signed his statement they brought him a cup of tea. A detective inspector came in to read through it. He glanced at Adrian.

'Looks like you're in a bit of luck, Bullock. Zak is not exactly a stranger to us. About five nine, you say?'

'Well I said I thought he was about the same size as Sergeant Canter.'

'Stud in the left ear?'

'I'm pretty sure it was the left.'

'Yeah. We lost the bastard a couple of months ago. If he's where you say he is you've done us a bit of a favour.'

'Oh well. Anything to help.'

The detective inspector laughed.

'Get him charged and sorted out with a brief, John. Possession.'

'What's a brief?' asked Adrian when the inspector had gone.

'Solicitor.'

'Oh. I thought . . . you know, legal aid. Don't you provide one?'

A boy like you . . . your parents are going to want to appoint one.'

'My parents?'

'Yeah. What's their address?'

'I'd I'd much rather keep my parents out of it. They don't know where I am you see and I've put them through enough really.'

'They file you as a missing person?'

'Yes ... I mean, I think they did go to the police. I bumped into my godfather and he said they had.'

'I think they'd be happier knowing where you are then, don't you?'

But Adrian remained firm and was led to the desk to be charged as Hugo Bullock.

'Empty your pockets on the desk, please.'

His possessions were examined and itemised in a ledger.

'You have to sign so that when you get them back you know we haven't robbed you,' said Canter.

'Oh lordy lord, I trust you,' said Adrian, who was beginning to enjoy himself. 'If a chap can't consign his chattels to an honest constable without suspicion then what has the world come to?'

'Yeah, right. We'll need your signature anyway. Oh, and there's one other thing, Adrian.'

'Yes?'

'Ah,' said Canter. 'So it's Adrian Healey, is it? Not Hugo Bullock.'

Damn, shit, bollocks and buggery-fuck.

D.S. Canter was holding up Anouilh's Antigone. Adrian's name was written on the fly-leaf.

'Clever lad like you, falling for a trick like that,' he tutted. 'No Bullock on the missing persons list, you see. But I bet there'll be a Healey, won't there?'

II

A bell rang in the corridor, doors slammed and voices rose in anger.

'Watch yourself, Ashcroft, one more sound out of you and you're on report.'

'But what did I do?'

Adrian shut his eyes and tried to concentrate on the letter he was writing.

'Right! I warned you. Loss of privileges for a week.'

He took a piece of paper and spread it flat on the table. A cold wind blew outside and the sky had darkened to gunmetal grey. Snow was on the way.

'Please Mr Annendale, may I get a book from the library?'

'If you hurry.'

Adrian picked up a pen and began.

Dear Guy,



I have been meaning to pluck up the nerve to write to you for some time. I was finally pricked into action by seeing you in The Likeness the other night. You were brilliant as always. I loved you in both parts - though the Good Shelford reminded me more of the Guy I Know (up in the gallery) . . .



I wonder if you found out what happened to me? I have a feeling that you imagined me skipping off with your money. But perhaps you heard the truth. The fact is that after I had been to see your friend Zak I was arrested by the police in possession of your end-of-shoot cocaine – you were just finishing The Red Roof if you remember. You'll be pleased to know, by the way, that Zak wasn't ripping you off– the haul was described in court as seven grammes of highest quality Andean flake.



It may be that you've been suffering from a guilty conscience about my innocent involvement in the whole affair, but if you have, I can now cheerfully relieve you of that burden. I was treated well and never put under pressure to reveal any names.



The old parents rallied round with character witnesses - godfathers, bishops, generals, even my old Housemaster at school would you believe? – and with squads of armed and dangerous solicitors. What chance did the magistrates stand? It was only by calling on all their reserves of pride and self-control that they managed to summon up the nerve even to put me on probation. I think one of them was so overcome by my quiet dignity and round-eyed innocence that he came within an ace of recommending some kind of civilian award for me.



Since then I have been to a crammer's in Stroud, passed exams and find myself filling in time teaching at a prep school in Norfolk before going off to St Matthew's College, Cambridge – not quite poacher turned game-keeper . . . slave turned slave-master? Something like it. Boy turned man, I suppose.



My name, as you probably know, is as far from Hugo Bullock as a name can be without actually falling over, but I won't bother you with it. This is just to wish you well and thank you for a month or two of unsurpassable fun and frolic.



I hope you are now treating your nostrils as well as you treated



Your very own



Hugo Bullock



There was a knock on the door.

'Please, sir, can I ask a question?'

'Newton, I distinctly heard with my own two ears - these, the ones I put on this morning because they go so well with my eyes - that Mr Annendale gave you permission to go to the library and get a book. I did not hear him give you permission to come to my room.'

'It's just a quick question . . .'

'Oh, very well.'

'Is it true, sir, that you and Matron are having an affair?'

'Out, out! Get out! Out before I slash your throat with a knife and hang you dripping with blood from the flag-pole. Out, before I pull your guts from your body and stuff them down your mouth. Out, before I become mildly irritated. Go, hence, begone. Stand not upon the order of your going, but go at once. Run! run quickly from here, run to the other side of Europe, flee for your life nor give not one backward glance. I never hope to see you again in this world or the next. Never speak to me, never approach me, never advertise your presence to me by the smallest sound, or by the living God that made me I will do such things... I know not what they are but they will be the terrors of the earth. Flee hence, be not here, but somewhere in a vast Elsewhere to which I have no access. Boys who rub me up the wrong way, Newton, come to a sticky end. Be removed, piss off, heraus, get utterly outly out.'

'Thought so.'

'Grr!'

Adrian flung a book at the hastily closing door, signed the letter and lit a pipe. The snow had started to fall.

He had no more duties for the day so he decided to do a bit more work on The Aunt That Exploded, a play for the end of term that he had been cajoled into writing.

If Harvey-Potter was going to play Aunt Bewinda, something would have to be done about preserving his soprano. A definite fissure had appeared in his larynx at breakfast and a tenor Bewinda would be worse than useless. He should talk to Clare about deliberately shrinking the boy's underpants in the laundry. Anything to keep nature at bay for two months.

He still had to work on Maxted, the only master who had so far refused to participate.

'You can kick my arse from here to Norwich, Adrian, I'm not going to dress up in shorts for any man living.'

The principal idea of the play was that boys played grownups, parents, aunts, doctors and schoolmasters, and the staff played boys and, in the case of Matron, a little girl.

'Come on Oliver, even the Brigadier has agreed. It'll be wonderful.'

'If you can tell me in one word what's wrong with The Mikado?1

'No, can't do that. "It's crap" is two words and "It's complete crap" is three.'

'Of course The Mikado is crap, but it's good healthy stodgy crap. Your blasted play is either going to be horrible pebbly crap or a great gush of liquid crap.'

'I'll do all your duties this term. How about that?'

'No you bloody won't.'

That hadn't been such a clever offer. Maxted enjoyed being on duty.

'Well I think you're a heel and a stinker and I hope that one day you'll be found out.'

'Found out? What do you mean?'

'Ho hee!' said Adrian, who knew that everyone lived in fear of being found out.

But Maxted was not to be moved, which was a nuisance because, set off in shorts and school-cap, his paunch and purple complexion would have been terrifically striking. Perhaps Adrian himself would have to play Bewinda's nephew. Not ideal casting: he was still closer in age to the boys than to any of the staff.

But it was a snug problem, the perfect sort of problem for a man in a tweed jacket, sitting in a fire-lit room with a good briar pipe between his teeth, a glass of Glennfiddich at his elbow and a blizzard whipping up outside, to ponder over. A clean problem for a clean man with a clean mind in the clean countryside.

He rubbed his fingers against the grain of his stubble and thought.

All gone. All anger quelled, all desire drained, all thirst slaked, all madness past.

There would be cricket next term, coaching and umpiring, teaching the young idea how to deal with the ball that goes on with the arm, reading them Browning and Heaney on the lawn when the sun shone and it was too hot to teach indoors. The rest of the summer would be spent discovering Milton and Proust and Tolstoy ready for Cambridge in October where, like Cranmer - but with a bicycle instead of a horse - his mind and thighs would find exercise. A handful of civilised friends, not too close.

'What do you make of that bloke in your college, Healey ?'

'He's hard to get to know. I like him, but he's private, he's unfathomable.'

'Detached somehow . . . almost serene.'

Then a degree and back here or to another school - his own perhaps. Stay on at Cambridge even . . . if he got a First.

All gone.

He didn't believe himself for a moment, of course.

He looked at his reflection in the window. 'It's no good trying to fool me, Healey,' he said, 'an Adrian always knows when an Adrian is lying.'

But an Adrian also knew that an Adrian's lies were real: they were lived and felt and acted out as thoroughly as another man's truths - if other men had truths - and he believed it possible that this last lie might see him through to the grave.

He watched the snow building up against the window and his mind caught the tube to Piccadilly and climbed the steps from the Underground.

There stood Eros, the boy with the bow poised to shoot, and there stood Adrian, the schoolmaster in tweeds and cavalry twills, looking up at him and slowly shaking his head.

'Of course you know why Eros was put in the Circus in the first place, don't you?' he remembered saying to a sixteen-year-old who was sharing his pitch outside the London Pavilion one July evening.

'Named after the Eros Strip Club, was it?'

'Oh that's close, but I'm afraid I can't give it you, I'll have to pass the question over. It was part of a tribute to the Earl of Shaftesbury: a grateful nation honours the man who abolished child labour. Gilbert Scott, the sculptor, positioned Eros with his bow and arrow aiming up Shaftesbury Avenue.'

'Yeah? Well, fuck all that, there's a trick over there been eyeing you up for the past five minutes.'

'Had him. Overuses the teeth. He can find someone else to circumcise. The point is, it's a kind of visual pun, Eros burying his shaft up Shaftesbury Avenue. You see?'

'Then why's he pointing down Lower Regent Street?'

'He was taken down and cleaned during the war and the fools who put him back up didn't know buggery ding-dong shit.'

'He could do with cleaning again.'

'I don't know. I think Eros should be dirty. In Greek legend, as I'm sure you are aware, he fell in love with the minor deity Psyche. It was the Greek way of saying that, in spite of what it may believe, Love pursues the Soul, not the body; the Erotic desires the Psychic. If Love was clean and wholesome he wouldn't lust after Psyche.'

'He's still looking this way.'

'His bottom is, at any rate.'

'No, the trick. He's started cruising me now.'

'I will clear away for you. Too many cocks spoil the brothel. Have him with my blessing. Just don't come crawling to me with your glans half hanging off, that's all.'

'I'll give him a minute to make up his mind.'

'Do that. I'm bound to wonder, meanwhile, was there any life more futile and perfectly representative than that of Lord Shaftesbury? His own adored son killed in a schoolboy fight at Eton while his national monument daily supervises child labour of a nature and intensity he would never have guessed at.'

'I'm definitely on here. See you later.'

Adrian dropped a log on the fire and stared into the flames. He was as secure as anyone: a real teacher with a real name, real references and real qualifications. No forgeries or tricks had brought him here, only merit. No one on earth could bang into the room and drag him to judgement. He really was a schoolmaster in a real school, really stirring a real fire in a safe and snug common room that was as real as the winter weather that really raged in the real world outside. He had as much right to pour a finger of ten-year-old malt and puff a 'soothing pipeful of the ready-rubbed as anyone in England. The grown-up didn't live who had the power to snatch away the bottle, confiscate the pipe or reduce him to stammered excuses.

Yet the sparks that spat up the flue spelt Wrigleys and Coke and Toshiba in Piccadilly neon; the escape of steam from the logs hissed a meeting of prefects plotting punishment.

He knew he could never jingle change in his pocket or park his car like a confident adult, he was the Adrian he had always been, casting a guilty look over a furtive shoulder, living in eternal dread of a grown-up striding forward to clip his ear.

But there again, when he sipped at the whisky his eyes failed to water and his throat forgot to burn. The body shamelessly welcomed what once it would have rejected. At breakfast he demanded not Ricicles and chocolate spread, but coffee and unbuttered toast. And if the coffee was sugared he leapt from it like a colt from an electric fence. He ate the crust and left the filling, guzzled the olives and spurned the cherries. Yet inside he remained the same Adrian who fought down the urge to stand and shout 'Bollocks' during church services, smelt his own farts and wasted hours skimming through National Geographic on the off-chance of seeing a few naked bodies.

He turned back to his work with a sigh. God could worry about what he was and what he wasn't. There was the tea-party scene to be written.

He hadn't been working for more than ten minutes when there came another knock at the door.

'If that is anyone under the age of thirteen they have my permission to go and drown themselves.'

The door opened and a cheery face peered round.

'Wotcher, cock, thought I'd come and cadge a drink.'

'My dear Matron, you can't have run out of Gees linctus again.'

She came and looked over his shoulder.

'How's it going?'

'The agony of composition. Got to keep everyone satisfied.

I'm preparing a huge part for you.'

She massaged his neck.

'I can take it.'

'Oh you proud, snorting beauty, how I love you.'

It was a private joke that the boys had somehow got wind of.

She was a thoroughbred filly and he was her trainer. Adrian had started it when he found out that her father bred racehorses for a living. She looked the part too, with a great mane of chestnut hair and dark eyes that she rolled in mock passion when Adrian patted her hindquarters.

She had come to Chartham as an assistant matron at the age of sixteen and had been there ever since. There were rumours amongst the staff that she was a lesbian, but Adrian put that down to wishful thinking on their part. She was now such an attractive twenty-five-year-old that they had to find some excuse for not desiring her and her liking for jeans and jackets over skirts and blouses made sapphic preferences an obvious escape route for them.

She had latched onto Adrian as soon as he had arrived.

'She always pretends to pant after new masters,' Maxted had said. 'It's just showing off to the boys to disguise her dykery. Tell her to bog off.'

But Adrian enjoyed her company: she was brisk and clean. Her breasts were high and handsome, her thighs strong and supple and she was teaching him to drive. Despite the heat of their language they had never come close to anything physical, but the thought beat its wings in the air whenever they were together.

He watched her wandering around his room, picking things up, examining them and putting them down again in the wrong place.

'She's restless, she needs a good gallop over the downs,' he said.

She went to the window.

'It's really settling, isn't it?'

'What is?'

'The snow.'

'I find it unsettling as a matter of fact. I'm on duty tomorrow and I shall have to find something for the boys to do. The rugger pitch will be four foot under if it carries on at this rate.'

'The school was cut off from the outside world for a whole week in seventy-four.'

'And it's been cut off ever since.'

She sat on the bed.

'I'm leaving at the end of the year.'

'Really? Why?'

'I'll have been here nearly ten years. It's enough. I'll go home.'

Every member of staff spoke regularly about leaving at the end of the year. It was their way of showing that they weren't stuck, that they had a choice. It meant nothing, they always came back.

'But who will spoon out the little darlings' malt? Who will paint their warts and kiss the place and make it well? Chartham needs you.'

'I mean it, Ade. Clare is fretting in her loose-box.'

'It's time some stallion was found to cover you, certainly,' Adrian agreed. 'The colts here have been very disappointing and the staff are all geldings.'

'Except you.'

'Ah, but I've still a few seasons of racing left in me before I get put out. After I've won the Cambridge Hurdles my stud fees will be that much higher.'

'You're not a queer are you, Adrian?'

He was startled by the question.

'Well,' he said, 'I know what I like.'

'And do you like me?'

'Do I like you? I'm flesh and blood aren't I? How could anyone not be thrilled by your tightly fleshed points, your twitching hocks, your quivering neck, your shining hindquarters, your heaving, shimmering flanks?'

'Then for God's sake, fuck me. I'm going mad.'

For all his talk, Adrian had never experienced a human being of another gender before and writhing around with Clare, he was astonished by the strength of her desire. He hadn't expected that women actually felt the kind of urge and appetite that drove men. Everyone knew, surely, that females went for personality, strength and security and were resigned to the need to be penetrated only if that was the price for keeping the man they loved? That they should arch their backs, spread wide the lips of their sex in hunger and urge him in was something for which he was not prepared. Adrian's room was at the top of the school and they had locked the door, but he couldn't help feeling that everyone would be able to hear her squeals and roars of pleasure.

'Bang me, you bastard, bang me hard! Harder! Deeper and harder, you lump of shit. God that's good.'

It explained all those jokes about bedsprings. The sex he had taken part in up until now didn't build up these colossal pounding rhythms. He found himself driving faster and faster and joining in her shouts.

'I . . . think . . . that . . . I'm . . . about ... to ... wheeeeeee! . . . whooooo! . . . haaaaaaa . . .'

He collapsed on her as she thrashed herself calm. Panting and sweating, they wound down together into a kind of breathless quiet.

She gripped his shoulders.

'You beautiful fucking son of a bitch. My God I needed that. Woof!'

'As a matter of fact,' gasped Adrian, 'I think I did too.'

Clare taught him a great deal that term.

'Sex is meaningless,' she said, 'if it's silent and mechanical. You have to think about it and plan it, like a dinner party or a cricket match. I tell you when to put in, how it's feeling, you tell me what you like, when you're coming, how you want me to move. Just remember that you have never thought a thought or imagined an act that is so dirty and depraved that I won't have thought of it thousands of times myself. That's true of everyone. When we stop talking and joking we'll know it's over.'

Two nights after the last day of term the headmaster and his wife had gone out to a dinner party, so Clare and Adrian found they had the whole school to themselves. It was cold, but they had run naked around the classrooms where she had thrown herself over a desk to be spanked, into the kitchens where they had hurled jam and lard at each other, into the staff common room where he had pumped her up with the football pump, into the boys' showers where she had urinated over his face and finally into the gymnasium where they had rolled and rolled over the mats, shrieking and slithering and jerking in frenzy.

He lay looking up at the climbing ropes that hung from the ceiling. During the act all his senses had been suspended, but now it was over he felt the bruise on his shoulder where he had barged into a door, smelt the sour lard and urine and jam that was all over him and heard the hot-water pipes rattling under the floor and the bubbles of wind building up in Clare's bowels.

'Bath,' he said. 'Bath then bed. God I'm going to need these holidays.'

'Stay with me here for while.'

It was their one point of disagreement. Adrian had never been able to luxuriate in the afterglow.

'Time for my tub.'

'Why do you always want to have a bath the moment after you've made love to me? Why can't we wriggle in our dirt for a while?' she said.

He fought down his customary post-coital irritation and contempt.

'Don't go looking for something psychological that isn't there. I have a bath after any kind of strenuous exercise. It doesn't mean I feel dirty,' though he did, 'it doesn't mean I'm trying to wash you out of my life,' though he was, 'it doesn't mean guilt, shame, repentance or anything like that,' though it did. 'It just means I want a bath.'

'Queer!' she shouted after him.

'Lesbian!' he yelled back.

When he came back next term, she was gone. Her replacement was a forty-year-old with one breast who most certainly was lesbian, which allowed the rest of the staff the free luxury of finding her irresistibly desirable. They spent their days saying she was a grand old girl and their evenings attempting to coax her down to the pub.

'Your girlfriend has gone, sir,' said Newton. 'Whatever are you going to do?'

'I shall devote the rest of my life to beating you into a puree,' said Adrian. 'It will help me forget.'

III

The morning of the match, Hunt had put a message under Adrian's toast as usual. This time it was a large heart-shaped piece of paper covered in kisses. This was going too far.

In theory, the boy on clearing duty should be the one to make masters' toast, but Hunt had long since decided that no one but he was going to make Adrian's. He fought everyone for the right. Whenever Adrian came down there would be two pieces on his side plate, and under them would be a message, usually nothing more dreadful than 'Your toast, sir . . .'or 'Each slice hand-grilled the traditional way by heritage craftsmen'. But love-hearts were too much, Adrian looked round the hall to where Hunt was sitting. The boy pinkened and gave a small wave.

'What's Hunt the Thimble given you today, sir?' asked Rudder, the prefect next to Adrian. Hunt was known as the Thimble for the obvious reason and because he was said to be rather under-endowed.

'Oh nothing, nothing . . . the usual drivel.'

'I bet it isn't, sir. We told him that it was Valentine's Day today.'

'But Valentine's Day, Rudder dearest, falls on February the fourteenth and lies there until the fifteenth of that month. Unless I have become so bored by your anserine conversation and fallen asleep for seven months, this is currently the month of June we are enjoying. What else, after all, could explain your cricket whites?'

'I know, sir. But we told him Valentine's Day was today. That's the joke.'

'Ah! Well, if the Queen can have two birthdays, why cannot Hunt the Thimble be granted the right to celebrate two Valentine's Days?'

'He told me,' said Rudder, 'that if he didn't get one back from you, he was going to hang himself.'

'He said what? said Adrian, going white.

'Sir?'

Adrian grabbed Rudder's arm.

"What did he say?'

'Sir, you're hurting! It was just a joke.'

'You find the idea of suicide amusing, do you?'

'Well no, sir, but it was just . . .'

There was a silence. The boys at his table looked down at their cereal bowls. It wasn't like Adrian to be angry or violent.

'I'm sorry my angels,' he said, with an attempt at a laugh. 'No sleep last night. Working on the play. Either that or I'm turning mad. It was a full moon you know, and there's a history of lycanthropy in my family. Uncle Everard turns into a wolf every time he hears the Crossroads theme tune.'

Rudder giggled. The uncomfortable moment passed.

'Well, looks like a fine day today. I vote we load a crate of Coke onto the minibus before we go. You know what Narbor-ough match teas are like.'

A mighty cheer now. The other tables looked across enviously. Healey's lot was always having fun.

*

The atmosphere in the minubus was tense. Adrian sat with them and tried to appear sunny and confident. It was no good his telling them to remember that it was only a game when he was as nervous as a kitten himself.

'We'll take a look at the pitch,' he told Hooper, the captain, 'and we'll decide then. But unless it's decidedly moist, put them in the field if you win the toss. "Knock 'em up, bowl 'em out" . . . it never fails.'

He was pleased with what he had done to the cricket eleven. He had never been much of a player himself but he knew and loved the game well enough to be able to make a difference to a schoolboy team. Everyone had agreed, watching his first eleven play a warm-up match against a scratch Rest of the School side, that he had done a tremendous job in two weeks.

But now they faced their first real opposition and he was worried that against another school they would fall to pieces. Last year, Hooper told him, Chartham Park was the laughingstock of the whole area.

The bus whined up the Narborough driveway.

'Who's been here before?' ^ 'I have, sir, for a rugger match,' said Rudder.

'Why are other schools always so forbidding? They seem infinitely bigger and more serious and their boys all look at least forty years old.'

'It's not a bad place, sir. Quite friendly.'

'Friendly? The maws of the heffalump are open wide, but don't believe that it betokens friendliness. Trust no one, speak to no one. As soon as you've heard this communication, eat it.'

There was a boy in a Narborough blazer waiting to show the team where to go. Adrian watched them stream off to the back of the house.

'See you there, my honeys. Don't accept any hand-rolled cigarettes from them.'

An old master bustled out to welcome Adrian.

'You're Chartham Park, yes?'

'That's right. Adrian Healey.'

'Staveley. I'm not Cricket. Our man's giving the team a pep talk. It's morning break at the moment. Come; through to the staff room and savage a Chelsea bun with us.'

The staff room was baronial and crowded with what seemed to Adrian like a greater number of masters than Chartham had boys.

'Ah, Chartham's new blood!' boomed the headmaster. 'Come to give us a spanking, have you?'

'Oh well, I don't know about that, sir,' Adrian shook his hand. 'They tell me that you're hot stuff. Double figures would satisfy us.'

'That false modesty doesn't do, you know. I can smell your confidence. You're St Matthew's bound, I understand?'

'That's right, sir.'

'Well then, you'll be pleased to meet my Uncle Donald who's staying here until Cambridge term begins. He'll be your Senior Tutor at St Matthew's of course. Where is he? Uncle Donald, meet Adrian Healey, Chartham Park's new secret weapon, he's joining you at Michaelmas. Adrian Healey, Professor Trefusis.'

A short man with white hair and a startled expression turned and surveyed Adrian.

'Healey? Yes indeed, Healey. How do you do?'

'How do you do, Professor?'

'Healey, that's right. Quite right. Your entrance paper was very encouraging. Pregnant with promise, gravid with wit.'

'Thank you.'

'And you're a cricketer?'

'Well, not really. I've been trying to coach a bit, though.'

'Well best of luck, my dear. My nephew Philip has a youth like yourself on the staff- he'll be going to Trinity - who is said to have done much with the Narborough side. Quite the young thaumaturge, they tell me.'

'Oh dear. I think that means we can expect to be marmalised. I was hoping Narborough would have sunk into overconfidence.'

'Here he comes now, you'll be umpiring together. Let me introduce you.'

Adrian turned to see a young man in a cricket-sweater making his way towards them. It had to happen one day. It was bound to have done. Adrian always imagined that it would be in the street or on a train. But here? Today? In this place?

'I already know Hugo Cartwright,' he said. 'We were at school together.'

'Hello, Adrian,' said Hugo. 'Ready to be pounded into the dust?'

They put on their white coats and walked down to the ground.

'What sort of a wicket have you got for us?' Adrian asked.

'Not bad, slight leg-to-off slope from the pavilion end.'

'Got any bowlers who can use it?'

'We've a little leg-spinner I have hopes for.'

Adrian winced: he hadn't properly inoculated his team against leg-spin. It could run through a prep-school batting line-up like cholera through a slum.

'Does he have a googlie?'

'Ha-ha!' said Hugo.

'Bastard.'

He looked different but the same. Adrian's eyes could see the real Cartwright not too far beneath the surface. Behind the strengthened features he saw the smoother lines of the boy, within the firmer stride he read the former grace. His memory could scrub off four years of tarnish and restore the shining original. But no one else would have been able to.

If Clare had been with him and he had said, 'What do you think of that man there?' she would probably have wrinkled her nose and replied, 'Okay, I suppose. But I always think blond men look sinister.'

Everyone has their time, Adrian thought. You can meet people of thirty and know that when their hair is grey and their face lined, they will look wonderfully at their best. That Professor, for one, Donald Trefusis. He must have looked ridiculous as a teenager, but now he has come into his own. Others, whose proper age was twenty-five, grew old grotesquely, their baldness and thickening waistlines an affront to what they once were. There were men like that on the staff at Chartham, fifty or sixty years old, but whose true characters were only discernible in hints of some former passion and vigour that would come out when they were excited. The headmaster, on the other hand, was a pompous forty-one, waiting to ripen into a delicious sixty-five. What Adrian's own proper age was, he had no idea. Sometimes he felt he had left himself behind at school, at other times he thought he would be at his best in tubby and contented middle age. But Hugo . . . Hugo he knew would always be growing away from his fourteen-year-old perfection: the clues to his former beauty would become harder to find as each year passed, the golden hair would seem pale and weak at thirty, the liquid blue of the eyes would harden and set at thirty-five.

Summer's lease hath all too short a date, Hugo old boy, thought Adrian, but your eternal summer shall not fade. In my imagination you are immortal. The man walking beside me is merely The Picture of Hugo Cartwright, ageing and coarsening: I have the real Hugo in my head and he will live as long as I do.

'I think we'll bat first, sir,' the Narborough captain announced after winning the toss.

'That's it, Malthouse,' said Hugo. 'Knock 'em up and bowl 'em out.''

'Trust me to lose the toss,' said Hooper. 'Sorry, sir.'

'Don't be a dafty-trousers,' said Adrian. 'It's a good wicket to bat second on, it'll dry out all through the afternoon.'

He threw the ball to Rudder, Chartham's opening bowler, before taking his position at the stumps.

'Remember, Simon,' he said, 'straight and on a length, that's all you have to do.'

'Yes, sir,' said Rudder, swallowing.

The ground was in a kind of valley, with the looming Gothic of Narborough Hall on one rise and the church and village of Narborough on another. The pavilion was whitewashed and thatched, the weather perfect with only the faintest of breezes luffing the fielders' shirtsleeves. The grim seriousness of the children preparing to play, the detached amusement of Hugo at square leg, the church clock chiming mid-day, the round circles of fine gang-mown cuttings in the outfield, the sun winking off the roller by the sight-screen, the distant clatter of spiked shoes on the pavilion concrete, the open blue of the wide Norfolk sky, the six pebbles in the hand of Adrian's outstretched arm, this whole monstrous illusion froze, while to Adrian the world seemed to hold its breath as if uncertain that such a picture could last. This fantasy of England that old men took with them to their death-beds, this England without factories and sewers or council houses, this England of leather and wood and flannel, this England circumscribed by a white boundary and laws that said that each team shall field eleven men and each man shall bat, this England of shooting-sticks, weather-vanes and rectory teas, it was like Cartwright's beauty, he thought, a momentary vision glimpsed for a second in an adolescent dream, then dispersed like steam into the real atmosphere of traffic-jams, serial murderers, prime ministers and Soho rent. But its spectral haze was sharper and clearer than the glare of the everyday and, against all evidence, was taken to be the only reality, its vapour trapped and distilled in the mind, its image, scents and textures bottled and laid down against the long, lonely melancholy of adulthood.

Adrian brought down his arm.

'Play!'

Rudder bowled a ball of full length and the batsman swept his bat elegantly forward in defence. But the ball had already gone through him and Rice the wicket-keeper was leaping in glee. The batsman looked round in disbelief to see his off-stump lying on the ground. He returned to the pavilion shaking his head, as if Rudder had been guilty of some appalling social blunder. There was a liquid spatter of applause from the boundary. The school were in lessons and wouldn't be watching until after lunch.

Adrian tossed a pebble into his right hand and smiled across at Hugo.

'I got him, sir!' said Rudder, polishing the ball against his leg. 'I bloody got him. Golden bloody duck.'

'You beat him for pace, old love,' said Adrian, drawing him aside. 'The next batsman will be scared, bowl him two very quick ones just outside the line of off-stump and then a slower ball on middle, but disguise it.'

'AH right, sir.'

Adrian wondered if it was a breach of etiquette for an umpire to coach during play. But then he saw Hugo, who had been replacing the bails at the other end, whispering urgently to the incoming number three. Very well then, they would fight it out between them, like First World War generals.

Rudder did as he was told for the first two balls, letting them fly at the new batsman, who played and missed at the first and left the second alone. He came thundering up for the third ball, grunting and stamping like a buffalo. The batsman quaked.

'Subtle disguise I don't think,' Adrian said to himself.

The ball was let go of early and seemed to float in at half the speed. The batsman had nearly completed his defensive stroke by the time it got to him, with the result that the ball was knocked from his bat gently back to Rudder who threw it up in the air with a yell of triumph.

'Caught and bowled! And hast thou slain the number three? Come to my arms, my beamish boy. Two for none, oh frabjous day, calloo callay!'

Hugo was furious at lunch. His side had been bowled out for fourteen runs. He couldn't believe it.

'I'll kill them!' he said. 'I'll castrate them and hang their scrotums from the score-board.'

'Don't worry,' said Adrian. 'We'll probably be all out for ten.'

'I'm going to replace the whole team with boys from the scholarship Sixth. At least they'll have some brains. What good is ball sense without common sense? I mean, trying to square cut a straight half-volley! It makes me want to throw up.'

Adrian was sure that he himself wouldn't sulk quite as gracelessly if it had been his side that had been dismissed for fourteen. But then Cartwright had always been ambitious. He remembered the time they had walked back from Biffen's tea-party and Cartwright had talked about going to Cambridge. That had been the same day that Trotter had hanged himself.

Adrian smothered a sudden desire to rap his spoon on the table, call for quiet and announce, 'This man opposite me here, my fellow umpire, I thought you might like to know that he sucked me off one night in a hotel when he thought I was asleep.'

'Funny old game,' he remarked instead.

'Look,' said Hugo. 'If you do cream us straight after lunch, how would you feel about making it a two-innings match?'

'Well...'

'It'll go down as your victory of course, but we do need the practice.'

'All right,' said Adrian. 'I'll check with my team first.'

Hooper was doubtful.

We've never played two innings before, sir. What happens when we pass their first score?'

'We make as many runs as possible before we're all out.'

'Sir, suppose they can't get us all out?'

'That's when you have to declare, dear. Make sure you judge it so that there's time to put them in again, bowl them out and then pass their total before stumps. We don't want a draw.'

'When are stumps?'

'Narborough's Mr Cartwright and I agreed on seven o'clock. I'll have to ring the school and check with the headmaster. You'll be late for bed of course, but it'll all be the most super-duper fun.'

The whole school turned out to watch after lunch. As Adrian had feared, Narborough's leg-spinner, Ellis, completely baffled his boys. Once they had got used to the ball bouncing and spinning one way, he would send down top-spin and undetectable googlies that made the ball fly off to the waiting close field. Chartham was all out for thirty-nine after an hour and a half of tortured embarrassment. Hugo looked very smug as Narbor-ough prepared for their second innings.

'We're only twenty-five ahead,' said Adrian.

'That's all right, isn't it, sir?' said Rudder. 'If we get them out for fourteen again we'll have won by an innings and eleven runs.'

'If.'

The Narborough openers stalked to the wicket looking determined and confident. They were playing in front of their home crowd now and had experienced the satisfaction of seeing the Chartham team writhe.

Rudder's first ball was a wide. Adrian signalled it, with raised eyebrows.

'Sorry, sir,' said Rudder with a grin.

His next ball was driven to the mid-off boundary, the next was hooked for six. The fourth, a no-ball, was late-cut for two which became six after four overthrows had been added. The next two were both glanced for four. Rudder turned to Adrian to collect his sweater.

'Two more balls yet, Simon.'

'Sir?'

'There was a wide and a no-ball in there. Two more balls.'

'Oh. Yes, sir. I forgot.'

The next two were each smacked for four over Rudder's head.

'What's going wrong, sir?'

'What's going wrong is you're not bowling properly. Line and length, darling, line and length.'

For the next two hours the opening pair batted freely and fiercely, putting on a hundred and seventy-four, until one of the batsmen, the same man Rudder had clean bowled first ball of the morning, retired to let some of his friends enjoy the slaughter.

Hugo's merriment was unbearable over tea, for all the whiteness of his teeth and the sparkle in his eyes.

'Well that's a bit more like it,' he said. 'I was beginning to get worried this morning.'

'Dear old friend of my youth,' said Adrian, 'I'm afraid you've discovered our principal weakness.'

'What, you can't bowl you mean?'

'No, no. Sympathy. My boys were simply devastated by your glumness at lunch, so we decided to cheer you up by letting you have some batting practice. I take it you're declaring over tea?'

'You bet. Have you out of here, tail between your legs, by half past five.'

'Is that a promise?' said a voice behind them. It was Professor Trefusis.

'Certainly, sir,' said Hugo.

'What do you think, Mr Healey?'

'Well let me see . . . two hundred and thirty-nine to make before seven. I think we can do it all right, if we don't panic'

'Ellis isn't tired, you know,' said Hugo. 'He can bowl for hours at a stretch.'

'My boys were beginning to read him by the end,' said Adrian. 'We can do it.'

'I have just placed a bet with my nephew Philip,' said Trefusis. 'Two hundred pounds on Chartham to win at odds of five to one against.'

'What?' said Adrian. 'I mean . . . what?'

'I liked your entrance papers, most amusing. I don't see how you can fail.'

'Well,' said Hugo, as Trefusis ambled away, 'what a bloody idiot.'

'Oh, I don't know,' said Adrian, popping a sandwich into his mouth, 'smart investment if you ask me. Now, if you'll forgive me, I have to go and brief my platoon.'

'Want a side bet?' Hugo called out after him.



'Right,' said Adrian to his team. 'There's a man out there who is so sure, based on the evidence of what he's seen, that you can do it, that he has bet two hundred pounds that you will blow these bastards out of the water.'

They were padding up in the pavilion, forlorn but brave, like Christians preparing for an away match against Lions.

'But what do we do about Ellis, sir!' said Hooper. 'He's impossible.'

'That's a trough of piss. You step up to him and you cart him all over the park, is what you do. Just don't get pushed against your stumps. Aim for the close-in fielders, if you miss the ball you might manage to belt them with your bat on the follow-through.'

'Isn't that a bit unsporting, sir?'

'Arseholes. Whistle, hum, look unconcerned, look bored. When he's ready to bowl, you step forward and say you're not ready. Disturb his rhythm, demonstrate contempt. Don't forget, I'm out there, and he'll want to bowl from my end because of the slope.'

'You won't cheat will you, sir?'

'Cheat? Good heavens. This is an amateur cricket match amongst leading prep schools, I'm an Englishman and a schoolmaster supposedly setting an example to his young charges. We are playing the most artistic and beautiful game man ever devised. Of course I'll cunting well cheat. Now, give me my robe and put on my crown. I have immortal longings in me.'

Out in the middle, little Ellis took the ball and flipped it from hand to hand, with the disturbing competence of a born spinner of the ball.

Adrian patted his head.

'Good luck, little chap,' he said. 'Don't get upset if they punish you a bit. It's only a game, eh?'

Ellis looked puzzled. 'Yes, sir.'

A sporting round of applause from the Narborough boys welcomed Chartham's opening pair to the wicket.

'Here they come now. They're both rather savage hitters of the ball, I'm afraid. But if you don't lose your head you should be able to cut it down to ten or so an over. A word of advice, though. Try and do something about disguising that googlie of yours a bit better . . . sticks out like a sore thumb.'

Ellis tweaked the ball out of the side of his hand uncertainly.

'Thank you, sir.'

'All right, here we go. Don't be nervous.'

Frowde and Colville, the openers, had certainly taken the game-plan literally. They surveyed the field with lofty disdain and smiled faint patronising smiles at the short leg and silly point crowded around them, nicely blending admiration for their physical courage and doubt for their mental capacity. They were welcome to stand there and be cut in two, but they had been warned.

'Play!' said Adrian.

Ellis stepped forward. Frowde at the other end threw up a hand and bent to do up his shoe-laces.

'Sorry!' he called. 'Won't be a sec'

Ellis turned back to his mark and waited.

'All right, Frowde?' said Adrian.

'Fine thank you, sir. Just don't want to get tangled up when I start running.'

'Quite so,' Adrian dropped his arm. 'Play!!' he boomed.

Ellis bowled a full toss which Frowde hooked straight over the boundary. The short leg fielder glared at Ellis: the ball had nearly decapitated him.

Adrian signalled a four to the scorer.

'It was a six,' said Hugo at square leg.

'Sorry?'

'It was a six!'

'Are you sure?'

'Of course I'm sure! It went clean over.'

'Well if you're sure,' said Adrian, signalling a six. 'I didn't want to give ourselves two extra runs. That was a six, scorer!' he yelled, just as Ellis next to him was catching the return from deep mid-wicket. The blast in his ear made him drop the ball. Adrian picked it up for him.

'Try and get them to bounce on the ground first,' he said helpfully. 'That way it's harder for the batsman to hit quite so far.'

Ellis's second was a long hop square-cut for four.

'You see?' said Adrian. 'That's two fewer already.'

The next was on a good length and driven straight to close extra cover.

'There might be a couple here,' shouted Frowde to his partner.

'Genius,' thought Adrian, as they ran one run after the extra cover fielder fumbled the ball in his amazement at the possibility that anyone was going to run at all.

Ellis was made of stout stuff. His next ball was an excellent leg-break that nearly had Colville stumped.

Adrian stepped forward and patted the pitch.

'You must watch your feet after you've bowled,' he said to him. 'You're not allowed to run on in the area between the two wickets. It kicks up rough stuff and helps the bowler at the other end.'

Little Ellis was aghast at the possibility that Adrian might think he had been trying to cheat.

'I'm very sorry, sir,' he said. 'I didn't mean . . .'

'I'm sure you didn't, my dear fellow. That was just a warning, that's all. I'm sure it won't happen again.'

Ellis knocked the next ball from so wide of the stumps that it glanced straight across Colville for four byes.

He was taken off after three more catastrophic overs and retired to long on, blinking back tears and fending off the jeers of his home supporters on the boundary.

Cricket, thought Adrian. It's so character-building.

After the collapse of Ellis the outcome was never really in doubt. The fast man at the other end was competent but soon exhausted. Weirder and wilder alternatives were tried, boys who dropped slow balls from a great height, boys with violent actions like windmills that produced gentle long hops, boys who bowled balls that bounced twice before reaching the middle of the pitch, but to no avail. The openers put on a stand of a hundred and twelve and the fourth-wicket partnership of Rice and Hooper scored the final runs as Narborough church clock struck six.

Adrian watched it all with raised eyebrows and an impartial smile. Hugo boiled and seethed and glared, glancing miserably from time to time at the stony figure of his headmaster who sat perched on a shooting-stick next to Professor Trefusis.

'An instructive match,' said Adrian as he and Hugo pulled up the stumps. 'I thought we were in real trouble at one stage.'

'I can't understand what the hell went wrong with Ellis,' said Hugo. 'I really thought he was the most gifted cricketer in the school. An England prospect even.'

'He's young yet. Temperament is the problem there, I fancy. I tried to calm him down and encourage him to get on with his natural game, but he was a bit overawed. Don't give up on him, he's learnt a lot today.'

'He'll learn a bloody sight more after I'm through with him.'

The Narborough team, hot and limp with exertion and defeat, saw them off in the driveway. Hugo stood with them, sipping at a can of beer.

'Three cheers for Chartham Park,' called Malthouse, their captain, raising his arm with an attempt at casual gallantry. 'Hip-ip.'

'Ray!' murmured Narborough.

'Hip-ip!'

'Ray!'

'Hip-ip.'

'Ray.'

'Three cheers for Narborough Hall,' shouted a flushed and triumphant Hooper, punching the air. 'Hip-Hip!'

'Hooray!' bellowed Chartham.

'Hip-Hip-Hip!'

'Hooray!'

'Hip-Hip-Hip-Hip!'

'HOORAY!'

'Goodbye then, Hugo. See you for the return match.'

'We'll pulverise you.'

'Of course you will.'

A madness suddenly possessed Adrian. With a pounding heart he leant forward and whispered in Hugo's ear.

'I was awake, you know.'

'What?'

'That night in Harrogate. I was awake all the time.'

Hugo looked annoyed.

'I know you bloody were. Do you think I'm an idiot?'

Adrian stared open-mouthed and then burst out laughing.

'You total. . . you complete . . . you . . .'

Trefusis stepped forward.

'Well, young man, you've earned me a thousand pounds.

Here's two hundred, my original stake.'

'Oh really,' said Adrian. 'I couldn't.'

'Of course you could,' he pushed a bundle of notes at him. 'Tremendous display.'

'Yes, they're not a bad bunch, are they?' Adrian looked on affectionately as his team climbed into the minibus.

'No, no, no. You!'

'Professor?'

'I knew that the man who wrote those artfully disguised second-hand essays, who disgorged such specious and ill-thought-out nonsense with such persuasive and brilliant flair wouldn't let me down. You've clearly a genius for deceit and chicanery. I look forward to seeing you next term.'





Ten

'Well!' said Trefusis when Adrian had finished. 'Did I really say that? "A genius for deceit and chicanery"? Did I really? And we had only just been introduced. How rude.'

'I didn't take it so.'

'Well of course not.'

Trefusis groped about with this right hand in the driver's side glove compartment until he found a figgy oatcake, which he inspected carefully, blowing off a piece of fluff before popping it into his mouth. 'My goodness, Adrian,' he mumbled through the crumbs, 'that was all so much more than I had bargained for. Tell me . . .'

'Yes?'

'The girl who was the Matron at Chartham . . .'

'Clare? What about her?'

'Did you really . . .? I mean the lard and the football pump and the jam and the urine and so . . . and so on . . . you really did. . .?'

'Oh yes,' said Adrian. 'Isn't that usual?'

'Well now, usual. Usual isn't the word I'd've . . .' Trefusis wound down the window distractedly.

'Well anyway,' said Adrian, 'there it all is.'

'Young people sometimes give me the impression that I have never lived at all.'

'Surely you must have had experiences of a similar nature?'

'Oddly, no. Of a similar nature? No. It is profoundly strange I know, but I have not.'

'Well apart from . . .'

'Apart from what, dear boy?'

'Apart from, you know . . . that night in the lavs in Cambridge.'

'I beg your pardon? Oh . . . oh yes, of course. Apart from that, obviously.' Trefusis nodded contentedly. 'Now, unless I am more hugely mistaken than God, our service-station should be just around the corner. Ah! here we are. Petrol and lemon tea, I think. The car could do with a fill up and we could do with a fillip, hee-ho.'

Adrian, as the car swung off the road, marvelled, like many an English traveller before him, at the trimness and appealing order of continental service-stations. Euro-colours might be a little too bright and primary, but better this luminous cleanliness than the drab squalor of British motorway stops. How could they afford to have all the litter swept up and the paintwork so freshly maintained? Everything neat, from the little hanging-baskets of geraniums to the merry pantiled roofs that offered shaded parking to hot and weary travellers... a metallic gleam suddenly caught Adrian's eye. He gaped in astonishment.

Down the, end of the same row into which Trefusis was inexpertly manoeuvring the Wolseley was parked a green BMW with British licence plates and a Hoverspeed 'GB' sticker.

'Donald, look! It's them.'

'I should hope so too. I was most specific as to time.'

'You were what?'

'And don't forget, dearest lad, that the verb "to be" takes a nominative complement.'

'What?'

'You said "it's them". What you meant of course was, "it's they".' Trefusis pulled up the handbrake and opened the door. 'But that's unbearable pedantry. Who, in their right mind, says "it's they"? No one. Well? Are you going to sit in the car or are you going to come along with me and hear me practise my Luxembourgeois ?'

They took their trays of tea and buns to a table near the window. The couple from the BMW was sitting in a nonsmoking section at the other end of the dining area.

'It won't do to talk to them,' said Trefiisis. 'But it's good to know they are there.'

'Who are they?'

'Their names are Nancy and Simon Hesketh-Harvey and they have been kindly provided by an old friend of mine.'

'They're on our side then?'

Trefusis didn't answer. He bobbed his teabag up and down in its glass and thought for a moment.

'After the war,' he said at length, 'Humphrey Biffen, Helen Sorrel-Cameron, a mathematician called Bela Szabo and I had an idea.'

'At last,' said Adrian. 'The truth.'

'You shall judge. We had all of us worked together on Enigma and become increasingly interested, in our own ways, in the possibilities of language and machines. Bela knew very well that the path to what is now called computing had been opened up in Britain and America and that digital machines would one day be capable of linguistic programming. Turing's work at Bletch-ley had shown that the old Hollerin-based punched-card systems would soon be a thing of the past. Algorithmic, low-level mathematical languages would be followed by higher level modular intelligent languages giving rise, ultimately, to heuristic machines.'

'Heuristic?'

'Capable of learning by mistakes, of operating, like human beings, through trial and error. My interest in all this was not mathematical, nor especially social. I was not frightened of machines becoming cleverer than human beings, nor of their in some way "taking over". I was however very interested in the development of new languages.'

'On account of your having learnt all the existing ones and being in danger of growing bored?'

'You exaggerate charmingly. Bela returned to Hungary after the war, Humphrey married Lady Helen, as you know, and became a schoolmaster. I stayed on at Cambridge. But we continued to work, where possible, on our idea for a perfect high level language that could be spoken by both machines and human beings. The dream, you see, was to invent an inter- national language, like Esperanto, that would also serve as a lingua franca between man and machine.'

'But surely the ideal solution would be to teach a machine to speak English?'

'Well I'm very much afraid that this is what will happen. We had no way of predicting the arrival of the microprocessor, or perhaps I should say; we lacked the imagination to predict its arrival. The cost of computing has been reduced by a factor of a million in ten years. It is simply astonishing. This means that you can now buy for one pound processing ability that would have cost you a million pounds in nineteen-seventy-one.'

'But isn't that good?'

'Marvellous, simply marvellous. But of no use to me. There are now dozens of languages at work in computing. Cobol, Forth, C, Lisp, Superlisp, Fortran, BASIC, Pascal, Logo, simply scores of the wretched things. We have a new Babel. This will sort itself out as soon as computing power comes still further down in price. Before the end of the century we shall have computers that recognise existing human languages.'

'So what's the problem?'

'Oh, there's no problem. None at all. We spent thirty years mining what turned out to be a barren seam, that's all. Nothing wrong with that. That's academe-biz, as they say. I tell you this to give you the background of my relationship with Szabo. We stayed in touch, do you see? He inBudapest, I in Cambridge.'

Adrian said that he saw.

'Two years ago Szabo made a curious discovery. He had shifted the focus of his attentions over the years from pure mathematics to electronics, acoustic engineering and any number of invigorating related fields. Hungary is very good about that sort of thing. That coloured cube that everyone is playing with at the moment is Hungarian, of course. I suspect that it is the advantage of speaking a language understood by so few that has turned the Magyars into such experts in numbers and shapes and dimensions. There is even a Hungarian mathematician at the moment who is close to achieving what was once thought to be the impossible. He is on the brink of squaring the circle. Or is it circling the square? Whichever.'

'A Hungarian is the only man who can follow you into a revolving door and come out first,' quoted Adrian.

'Exactly. Szabo is just one such hornery cuss. He had been working, during the seventies, on cures for the common stutter, experimenting with ways of playing back the speech of a stutterer into their ears as they spoke. Apparently if a subject hears his own voice back a split second after he has spoken and while he is moving on to the next thing he wants to say, his stutter will be eliminated.'

'How baroque.'

'Baroque? If you say so.'

'But not very practical to go about the place in headphones, I should have thought.'

'Quite so. Far from a feasible cure for the affliction. Experience in this area, however, did lead Bela towards what turned out to be immensely fruitful researches into the speech centres of the brain. The subject that most interested him was that of lying or, as it were, saying the thing which is not. He wanted to find out what happened in the brain when people said things which were not true; to see, for example, whether there is any difference between telling a lie, making a mistake in memory and inventing a fiction, all of which involve, in one way or another, saying the thing which is not. Thus a man might say: "I have to work late tonight, darling," or "The German for a chive is ein Zwiebel," or "Once upon a time there was a fabulous trouser-eating dragon called Geoffrey." These might all be taken to be examples of a lie. The speaker is in fact not going to be working late that night, he is instead going to the flat of his mistress there to conjoin with her in carnal riot. That is an Alpha-type lie. In the second case the man's brain knows full well that Zwiebel is in fact the German for "onion" and that the word he is groping for is Schnittlauch, but his mind is unable for the moment to gain access to that information. His statement that ein Zwiebel is the German for "a chive" is therefore a Beta-type lie. And lastly, there never was a fabulous trouser-eating dragon called Geoffrey, once upon any time and what is more the speaker knows it: a Gamma-type pseudology. The Alpha-type, the first kind of lie, the moral lie, if you like, the lie that disturbs the conscience of the speaker, might well be detectable using a polygram machine, the other two most certainly will not be.'

'Your friends are leaving,' said Adrian.

The BMW couple had stood up and were making for the exit.

'Excellent!' said Trefusis. 'That means we really are being followed.'

'How do you mean?'

'If Nancy and Simon leave the rendezvous first it is a sign that we are not alone. If they let us leave first, it means that we go unobserved.'

'Moscow Rules, George. Moscow Rules all the way.'

'I beg your pardon?'

'Nothing. So who is following us?'

'I dare say we shall find out. Drink your tea precipitately. We must not lag too far behind.'

Out in the car park the BMW had gone. Trefusis opened the driver's side door of the Wolseley, while Adrian looked around for signs of other cars preparing to start up in pursuit.

'Can't see any likely looking candidates,' he said.

Trefusis stooped and picked something from the ground. He came up holding a thick oblong of folded paper which he handed to Adrian across the top of the Wolseley.

'This was wedged in the hinges of the door. What does it say?'

Adrian unfolded the oblong and spread it over the roof.

'I think it must be in code, or cypher, rather. Or whichever one was which. Either way it's gibberish to me. You take a look.'

Adrian revolved the sheet of paper to face Trefusis.

'Young Nancy takes after her mother,' he said. 'It's in Volapiik.'

'In what?'

'Volapük. A very silly international language devised at least a hundred years ago by a charming man called Johann Schleyer. "Vol" means world in his language and "piik" means speak. If he had known that in English it meant vomit, he might have chosen more carefully.'

'And what does the note say?'

'It seems that we are being followed by two cars, one a French-registered blue Lemon BX, whatever that might be, the other a white Swiss Audi Four.'

'They must mean a Citroen BX and an Audi Quattro, I should think.'

'That would seem to make sense. Well, this is refreshing to know, is it not?'

'What, that we're being followed?'

'Yes.'

'But we stick out like a sore thumb in this bloody jalopy.'

'I hope so. The element of surprise is absolutely crucial.'

'What element of surprise?'

'Exactly!' beamed Trefusis as he edged onto the autoroute and pointed the Wolseley towards Germany. 'That is what is so surprising.'

The staccato rush of cars travelling in the opposite direction reminded Adrian of interminable childhood journeys to the coast. He would gaze at his father's cocked wrists on the steering wheel or count all the four-legged animals in the fields as they passed, one for a sheep or cow, two for a horse, yawning repeatedly in a giddy cloud of car-sickness. He had had a trick of covering his ears with his hands and removing them rhythmically in time to the whoosh of each car as it passed the window.

He tried it again now.

'Are we there yet, Daddy?'

'Why do people always say that on car journeys?' asked Trefusis.

'It reminds them of when they were young.'

'Humph.'

'Anyway,' said Adrian. 'We were talking about lies.'

'So we were. Light me a cigarette, there's a good fellow.'

Adrian lit two from Trefusis's cigarette case and passed one over.

Trefusis took in a deep lungful of Gold Leaf.

'We can be fairly certain,' he said, 'that animals do not lie. It has been both their salvation and their downfall. Lies, fictions and untrue suppositions can create new human truths which build technology, art, language, everything that is distinctly of Man. The word "stone" for instance is not a stone, it is an oral pattern of vocal, dental and labial sounds or a scriptive arrangement of ink on a white surface, but man pretends that it is actually the thing it refers to. Every time he wishes to tell another man about a stone he can use the word instead of the thing itself. The word bodies forth the object in the mind of the listener and both speaker and listener are able to imagine a stone without seeing one. All the qualities of stone can be metaphorically and metonymically expressed. "I was stoned, stony broke, stone blind, stone cold sober, stonily silent," oh, whatever occurs. More than that, a man can look at a stone and call it a weapon, a paperweight, a doorstep, a jewel, an idol. He can give it function, he can possess it.'

'Surely when a bird uses a twig for nesting material it is doing the same thing?'

'Birds collect for nests much as we expand our lungs a dozen or so times a minute in order to suck in air or, in our case, tobacco smoke. It is, or so I am reliably informed by those who know, an entirely instinctive mechanism. Animals do not have the lying capability of man.'

'Keats's negative capability?'

'To some extent, yes. Within our brains connections are made and stored all the time. This word signifies this thing, this fact actually occurred, this experience was in truth undergone; the whatness and whichness of everything is established. Thus I ask you, "What did you drink just now?" and you reply "lemon tea" because lemon tea and your recent drinking are connected. If you deliberately wish to lie you think "lemon tea" - you can't help that because the link is there - but you search for some other drinking material and say, for example, "apple juice". A link is now made between your recent drinking activities, lemon tea and apple juice. The strongest link, however, is between the drinking activity and lemon tea because it is the true one. The link between what you drank and apple juice exists, because you created it. But it only exists through the link with the lemon tea. Are you following me?'

'Like a panther,' lied Adrian.

'The details of a lie are harder to recall than the truth, because they are less strongly linked in the mind. The act of remembering is literally just that: the act of reassembling the members of something. If the members are illusory it is naturally more difficult to enact this mental reconstruction.'

'So your friend Szabo discovered what happens in the brains of people when they lie and has invented some kind of lie-detector, is that it?'

'No, no. He did much more than that. He discovered a lie-deftector!'

Adrian watched the smoke from his cigarette being sucked through the quarter-light of the car. He had an awful feeling, deep down inside him, that he was somehow more than a passenger on this journey, more than an observer.

'A lie-deflector?' he said.

'Let us suppose that all true things are connected in the brain by pathways called A-type pathways and all untrue things are connected by B-type pathways.'

'Okay.'

'Imagine a machine which inhibits the brain from making any B-type connections. When under the influence of such a machine, the subject is simply unable to lie.'

'And this is what your friend Szabo has come up with?'

'Such is his claim.'

Adrian thought for a moment.

'There are some lies,' he said, 'which you tell . . . which people tell ... so often that they believe them themselves. What about those?'

'However much you may consciously believe what you are saying, your brain knows the truth, and has made connections accordingly. You may imagine, for instance, that on holiday in Sardinia you witnessed a gang of twelve bandits robbing a bank with machine guns and hand grenades, you may repeat this story to the dismay of all your acquaintances at every dinner party to which those friends have made the rash mistake of inviting you, such that you believe it surely and wholly. Nonetheless, buried under the dead neural weight of all these convictions, your brain knows perfectly well that in fact there were only two bandits with nothing more than a water-pistol and a spud-gun between them. Your brain was there too, you see, and it has registered the truth.'

'I do see. I do.'

'Szabo claims the machine is in fact as much a memory-retrieval device as a lie-inhibitor. It can just as easily make the subject disinter the German for "chive" as disgorge the details of his true whereabouts on the night in question.'

'Wow.'

'W, as you rightly remark, ow. Or, as they say in Poland, "Vov".'

'And where do you fit into all this?'

'Nowhere in the development of the machine. Bela and I have corresponded over the decades, and a little over a year ago he began to include in his letters to me references to his development of Mendax, as he has fancifully dubbed this fruit of his intellectual loins. Last July Istvan Moltaj, a violinist friend of his, left Hungary to take part in the Salzburg Festival. Bela entrusted him with a sheaf of papers relating to Mendax. The idea was that Moltaj should give the papers to me. We had an appointment to meet at Mozart's Geburtshaus in the Getreide-gasse. It is apparent that someone had either been following Moltaj or had intercepted Bela's letter to me arranging the rendezvous. He was there most unpleasantly killed, not ten yards away from us, as we both have cause to remember.'

'And he never got to give you the papers?'

'Moltaj had taken the sensible precaution of leaving a package for my collection at the reception desk of the Goldener Hirsch Hotel. The package contained a sheaf of musical manuscript paper. A duet for piano and violin. The music was cacophonous in the extreme but the notes corresponded to letters which spelt out a text in classical Volapuk.'

'So you got it?'

'You may remember that on our return to England last year we were robbed?'

'They took your briefcase!'

'They did indeed.'

'But, Donald, if I may say so . . .'

'Yes?'

'Why didn't you post the papers or something? If they were willing to cut a man's throat in broad daylight ... I mean just to go round with them in a briefcase in your car! Not exactly tradecraft, old man.'

Tradecraft?'

'You know. Not how Sarratt would train Circus men to operate in the field.'

'Adrian, I'm rather afraid that you are gibbering.'

'Le Carre. Operational procedures. A good field man would have taken the papers and shoved them in a DLB or DLD.'

'A what?'

'A Dead Letter Box or Dead Letter Drop.'

'Oh.'

'Moscow Rules, George, old boy. Moscow Rules all the way.'

'Yes, no doubt a Dead Letter Drop would have answered perfectly. I should have thought of that. Instead I made a false copy of the manuscript and left the real one in Salzburg.'

'You did?'

'It seemed sensible,' said Trefusis.

'So the papers in the briefcase that was stolen . . .?'

'Were drivel. It must have taken them a long time to discover, read it which way they might, that the manuscript they took from us contained nothing more illuminating than pages three-two-three to three-six-seven of the Salzburg telephone directory.'

'And what exactly did you do with the real manuscript?'

'There was a very nice chambermaid at the hotel. She said she would look after it for me. Was that bad tradecraft too?'

'Well,' said Adrian. 'If she's still got it, it was good tradecraft, if she hasn't, it wasn't.'

Trefusis inclined his head gratefully. 'Don't look behind you,' he said, 'but there has been a white Citroen two cars behind us for the last twelve kilometres. As to whether it's a BX or not, I really couldn't say.'

Adrian looked behind him.

'You still haven't told me,' he said, 'who was responsible for cutting this violinist's throat. . . what was his name again?'

'Moltaj.'

'Right. Do you know who killed him?'

'So many people would love to get their hands on a machine that can inhibit pseudology, mendacity and falsehood. The police, Intelligence services, all sorts and conditions of interested agencies and institutions. Bela, like any good scientist, is worried that he may have opened the door to something rather frantic, something rather ghastly.'

'What have I done? What have I done? Have we any business "taking away people's right to lie? That sort of thing.'

'Questions of free will certainly do seem to arise. It is perfectly possible to live a life from cradle to grave that is entirely dishonest. One might never reveal one's true identity, the yearnings and cravings of one's innermost self, even to the most intimate circle of family and friends; never really speak the truth to anyone. Priests and psychotherapists may believe that the confessional-box or the analysis session reveals truths, but you know and I know and every human being knows that we lie all the time to all the world. Lying is as much a part of us as wearing clothes. Indeed, Man's first act in Eden was to give names to everything on earth, our first act of possession and falsehood was to take away a stone's right to be a stone by imprisoning it with the name "stone". There are in reality, as Fenellosa said, no nouns in the Universe. Man's next great act was to cover himself up. We have been doing so ever since. We feel that our true identities shame us. Lying is a deep part of us. To take it away is to make us something less than, not more than, human. So at least Bela fears.'

'Yes,' said Adrian. 'You still haven't told me who killed Moltaj.'

'The Hungarians have a wonderful word,' said Trefusis. 'It is puszipajtás and means roughly "someone you know well enough to kiss in the street". They are a demonstrative and affectionate people, the Hungarians, and enthusiastic social kissers. "Do you know young Adrian?" you might ask and they might reply, "I know him, but we're not exactly puszipajtás."'

'I have no doubt whatever in my mind,' said Adrian, 'that all this is leading somewhere.'

'A few weeks ago Bela's grandson arrived in England. He is a chess-player of some renown, having achieved grandmaster status at last year's Olympiad in Buenos Aires. No doubt you followed his excellent match against Bent Larsen?'

'No,' said Adrian. 'I missed his match against Bent Larsen and somehow his matches against Queer Karpov and Faggoty Smyslov and Poofy Petrosian also managed to pass me by.'

'Tish and hiccups. Bent is a perfectly common Danish Christian name and it would do you no harm, Master Healey, to acquire a little more patience.'

'I'm sorry, Donald, but you do talk around a subject so.'

'Would you have said that?' Trefusis sounded surprised.

'I would.'

'I will then straight to the heart of the matter hie me. Stefan, the grandson of Bela, came to England a fortnight ago to play in the tournament at Hastings. I received a message to meet him in a park at Cambridge. Parker's Piece to be exact. It was ten o'clock of a fine June night. That is not extraneous colour, I mention the evening to give you the idea that it was light, you understand?'

Adrian nodded.

'I walked to the rendezvous point. I saw Stefan by an elm tree clutching a briefcase and looking anxious. My specifying that the tree was an elm,' said Trefusis, 'is of no consequence and was added, like this explanation of it, simply to vex you. The mention of the lad's anxiety, however, has a bearing. The existence of the briefcase is likewise germane.'

'Right.'

'As I approached, he pointed to a small shed or hut-like building behind him and disappeared into it. I followed him.'

'Ah! Don't tell me . . . the small shed or hut-like building was in fact a gentlemen's lavatory?'

'Meeting for the first time one of his grandfather's oldest friends, a man of whom he had heard much, Stefan naturally embraced me, bestowing a friendly kiss on each cheek. We were puszipajtás, do you see? Stefan then knelt to open his briefcase. It was at this point that two policemen emerged from a cubicle, making unpleasant insinuations and an arrest.'

'Is that a zeugma or a syllepsis?'

'It was an impertinence and an inconvenience.'

'It was in a convenience certainly . . . But you can hardly blame them. I mean, two men kissing in a lavatory and then one of them getting down on his knees . . . what was he thinking of?'

'The job in hand,' said Trefusis coldly.

'Oo-er!'

'Adrian, it is a long walk back to England. I suggest you keep your putrid sense of humour in check.'

'I'm sorry.' Adrian clamped his mouth shut.

'It is possible, I grant you,' Trefusis continued, 'that a person stumbling upon such a tableau might be tempted to place constructions of a deleterious nature upon it, but only if their minds were already composed of stuff so gross and rank in nature as to be themselves guilty of as much impropriety as the most shameless erotic miscreant in the land. Stefan, at any rate, found himself wholly perplexed by events. I managed to communicate to him in Hungarian, however, as we awaited the police van. I . . . er . . . created a scene and he was able to grab his briefcase and "make good his escape" as the newspapers have it.'

'What sort of a scene?'

'A scene-y sort of a scene. Just a general, you know, scene.'

'What sort of a scene?'

'Does it matter what sort of a scene?'

'Come on, Donald. What sort of a scene?'

'Oh very well. If you must know, I let out a screech of animal lust and attempted to remove the trousers of the officer detaining me.'

'You did what?

'Well I have no doubt you could have dreamt up a dozen more appropriate schemes, Adrian, but it was all that occurred to me under the duress of the moment. I scrabbled at the unfortunate man's trouserings and while his companion leapt forward to rescue him from this parlous circumstance, Stefan found himself temporarily deoppilated. He returned to the Shoulder of Lamb where he left the item he had come up expressly to deliver and which I have with me now. Bob then arranged for his safe return to Hastings'

'Yes, I was meaning to ask you. How come Bob is involved in all this?'

'Bob is a friend.'

'Bletchley?'

'Bob has been involved in all kinds of things in his time. He had his tongue ripped out by the Japanese.'

What?'

'Yes, but he doesn't talk about it.'

'Oh ha frigging ha. You still haven't told me who the enemy is.'

Trefusis reached for a figgy oatcake.

'Enemy?'

'Yes, enemy. The people who robbed us in Germany and stole your briefcase. The people who killed Moltaj and who are,' Adrian craned his neck round, 'still hot on our arses.'

'Well now, it would seem we have two "enemies", Adrian. Moltaj was killed by a servant of the Magyar Republic of Hungary, I think there is no doubt of that. Bela's employers have no intention of letting his invention leave their country'

'And now they are following us?'

'No, we are being followed by enemy number two. It was they who robbed us in Germany last year.'

'And who are they?'

'Well,' said Trefusis, 'I was rather hoping you might know that, Adrian.'





Eleven

I

In the corridor, Rudi nearly collided with an enomously fat man with a small head and lank hair. Rudi managed, with a supreme effort of balance and co-ordination, learnt on the ski-slopes of Innsbruck, to avoid the calamity of dropping the drinks tray he was carrying and preceded, trembling, on his way, cursing under his breath the rudeness and clumsiness of the guests as he went. Probably a music journalist in Salzburg for the Festival; such gracelessness was to be expected from the press.

Rudi tapped gently on the door to the sitting room of the Franz-Josef Suite and listened for a reply. This was his first week at the Österreichischer Hof and he was not certain if it was done simply to knock and enter as he would have done at the Hotel der Post in Fuschl-am-See where he had learnt his trade. The Österreichischer Hof was altogether smarter than the Hotel der Post and things were done here on the international scale, with taste, style, courtliness, discretion and just a Schluck of Austrian Gemütlichkeit.

There was no reply from within. Yet someone had ordered a bottle of Absolut lemon vodka and three glasses, someone had commanded room-service. Surely it was reasonable to suppose that someone was in the room? He knocked again and waited.

Still nothing. Most puzzling.

Rudi balanced the tray on his shoulder, leant forward towards the door, and coughed purposefully.

From inside he heard a voice. An English voice.

'Entschuldigen Sie . . .' Rudi called through the keyhole.

He could sense that his husky tones were not penetrating the thick wood of the door. Rudi was a little nervous. In the kitchens yesterday he had caused a beautiful puff-ball of Salz-burger Nockerl, the hotel's speciality, to deflate by dropping a fork into it by mistake, and two days ago - Rudi blushed at the memory - two days ago in the dining room he had spilt some kirsch down the shirt-front of Signor Muti, the famous conductor. Fortunately the maestro had been wearing one of his famous black polo-neck shirts and the stain had not shown up so much, but the memory was painful to Rudi.

English people. Were they deaf?

'Excusing me!'

Rudi knocked again, his head leaning against the door. He heard the voice still.

'. . . incontinently and savagely beautiful, not unlike a small chaffinch, but much larger and with less of a salty after-tang . . .'

This Rudi could not understand. The word 'beautiful' was familiar certainly. English girls who came to stay with their families at the Hotel der Post liked to say that it was 'a very beautiful morning this morning, Rudi', that the mountain and the lake and the Schloss were 'simply beautiful' and sometimes, when he had been lucky, that his hair and eyes and his legs and his Schwartz were so 'beautiful'. Beautiful he knew, but what was this 'chaffinch'? Of course! a green vegetable, like Kohl or Kraut, that was chaffinch. A strange conversation this man was having.

'. . . a certain degree of Schadenfreude under the circumstances is inevitable perhaps . . .'

'Schadenfreude7' He could speak German.

Rudi knocked until his knuckles were raw.

'Entschuldigen Sie bitte, mein Herr. Hier ist der Kellner mit Ihren Trinken!'

'. . . a message delivered by motor-bicycle. A curious new phenomenon these despatch riders . . .'

Rudi could wait no longer. He swallowed twice, turned the handle and entered.

A beautiful suite, the Franz-Josef. Herr Brendel the pianist had stayed there last week and the Bosendorfer Grand that had been installed for him had not yet been collected. They should keep the piano here always, Rudi thought. With the flowers and the cigarette boxes and long flowing curtains, it conspired to give the room the look of a film set from the nineteen-thirties. With great care he set down his drinks tray on top of the piano and listened again to the English voice.

'. . . this rider, standing in the threshold holding out a clipboard to be signed, reminded me at first of a copy of Izaac Walton's Compleat Angler that I have in my possession. Bound in leather, lavishly tooled and a lasting joy . . .'

'Your drinks are arrived, my sir.'

'. . . of the package that he delivered I can say only this . . .'

The voice was coming through from the bedroom. Rudi approached nervously.

'. . . it shocked me right down to my foundation garments. From stem to stern I quivered . . .'

Rudi straightened his bow-tie and tapped loosely on the half-open bedroom door with the back of his hand.

'Sir, your drinks that you have ordered . . .'

Rudi broke off.

The door he had knocked on so lightly had swung open to reveal a man sitting on the end of the bed, soaked from head to foot in blood. He faced a writing table on which stood a small radio.

'. . . I suppose there are degrees of startlement, much as there are degrees of anything. If there is an official scale comparable to, for example, the Beaufort, Moh or Richter Scales and if that scale be measured from one to ten, I would say that on this Trefusian Scale of Abject Bestartlement I scored at least a creditable 9.7, certainly from the European judges. The East Germans would probably have been less generous, but even they could not have failed to give me 9.5 for artistic impression . . .'

Rudi hugged the door-handle and half swung from the door, staring at the dead man with innocent surprise and wonder, like a child watching donkeys copulate.

A knock on the sitting-room door brought him to his senses.

A high English voice called through the sitting room.

'Martin! Are you there? Martin!'

Rudi jumped. This was witchcraft.

Two men had entered the sitting room, one silver-haired, the other closer to Rudi's age. They were smiling.

'Ah, lemon vodka on the piano. Very much Martin's poison.'

Rudi gasped.

'Sie sind. . . sie sindF said Rudi, pointing at the older man.

'Was bin ich?' the man asked in surprise.

So he was German, this man. But the voice. The voice was...

Rudi pointed to the bedroom.

'Der sitzt ein Mensch dareinF 'Is there something wrong with him, Donald?'

'Er ist tot! 'Oh dear,' said Trefusis, hurrying forwards. 'Please not.

Please not!'

Adrian followed him into the bedroom.

'. . .I will let you know, those of you who are interested, of course, the others will simply have to guess. Meanwhile if you have been, then continue to and don't even think of stopping.'

'Well, as the Professor has just told us, that was the last of the current series of Wireless Essays from the Desk of Donald Trefusis. Half an hour of World News in a moment, followed by Meridian. BBC World Service. This is Lond '

Adrian switched off the radio and brought his gaze to bear upon the young man on the bed.

His throat had been cut in a wide crescent from one ear to the other. It was as if a second mouth had been cut beneath the chin. Even the lining of the poor man's jacket had been ripped open. As with Moltaj the previous year, the flap of skin had a gruesomely false, plastic, made-up appearance. Adrian supposed that just as genuine gunfire was said not to sound realistic, so genuine death had a falser air than the gore of the movies.

Rudi gestured towards the radio: 'Das war Sie, nicht wahr?'

Trefusis nodded vaguely, fawohl, das war ich.'

'Aber Sie sind schon Österreicher oder Deutscber?'

'Nein, Engländer.'

'Echtr

'Echt, said Trefusis. 'Hast du die Polizei schon telefoniert?' 'Nein . . . icb bin nur zwo Minuten da . . .'

'Also:

Trefusis crossed over to the writing table and picked up the radio.

'Und hast dujemanden gesehen?'

'Nein . . . nie - Moment! Ja, ein dicker Mann . . . sehrdick . . .'

'Mit kleinem Kopfand schlichten Haare?'

'Ganz genau!'

'This young gentleman and I will await the police, Adrian.'

Adrian nodded. He felt sick, deeply sick. Sicker than when he had witnessed the death of Moltaj in Mozart's house, sicker than he had ever felt in his life. It was his fault. It was all his fault. From liar to murderer, like in the ^Esop fable.

Trefusis had sat at the table and was scribbling on a sheet of hotel writing-paper. Adrian steeled himself to turn and look at the dead man again. The torn throat and the blood soaking into the sheets were disgusting enough, but somehow the savage shredding of the viscose lining of the jacket seemed a world more obscene. It revealed a wanton animal fury that struck fear into Adrian's soul.

'Adrian, I want you to deliver this note to the British Consulate,' said Trefusis. 'It is to be placed into the hands of the addressee himself. None other.'

Adrian looked at the name written on the envelope.

'Are you sure, Donald?'

'Quite sure, thank you. The Consulate is situated in number four Alter Markt. This has all gone quite far enough.'

II

Adrian made his way across the Makart Steg bridge that connected the Österreichischer Hof with the old town. The Salzach flowed beneath him, traffic flowed past him on the Staatsbräcke, crowds of holiday-makers flowed around him and dark, dreadful thoughts flowed within him.

Some of the shops on the Franz-Josef Kai had begun to place posters in their windows of the conductors and soloists due to appear in the Festival. An umbrella and luggage shop by the taxi-rank where Adrian waited was tricolated in the yellow and black livery of the Deutsche Gramophon Gesellschaft. A huge photograph of von Karajan glowered out at him, distrust apparent in the deep frown and clenched brows, contempt all too clear in the upward thrust of the chin and the sour wrinkle about the mouth. Two-horse nacres flicked past him, bearing tourists and Festival-goers along the Mullner HauptstraBe. A bruised sky bore down. Adrian saw an image of the whole scene through a camera that was zooming outwards and outwards with himself in the centre diminishing and diminishing until he was a frozen part of a postcard pinned to a cork noticeboard in a warm suburban kitchen in England, eternally trapped, blessedly unable to move forwards or backwards in time or space.

At last, after twenty minutes, just as he was preparing to go in the shop and ask about buses, a Mercedes taxi drew up into the empty rank beside him.

'Britischen Konsulat, bitte. Alter Markt vier.'

Aber man kann es in zwo Minuten spazieren.'

'Scheiße. Never mind. Das macht nichts. Take me there anyway. Es sieht nach Regen aus.'

Indeed, as Adrian spoke, the first drops began to fall, and by the time the cab drew up outside the Alter Markt, which would indeed have taken only a few minutes to reach on foot, the rain was pouring heavily. The taxi had not been able to go right to the door of the Consulate, so Adrian had to thread his way through the market itself, where people were gathering for shelter under a stall that sold artificial flowers. Number four itself was a small doorway next to the Oberbank a few doors down from Holzermayer's, which sold the Mozartkügeln, small chocolate marzipans wrapped in silver-foil portraits of Salzburg's most famous son. Adrian had bought a box for his mother there the previous summer.

'Sir David who?'

The woman at the desk was not helpful.

'Pearce. I know he's here, could you just tell him that . . .hang on.' Adrian took a Festival brochure from a pile on the desk and wrote in a white space on the back. 'Just show him that. I'm sure he'll see me.'

Well I'm sorry, Mr . . . Telemackles, does it say?'

'Telemachus.'

'No one called Sir David anything at the Consulate. Never has been;'

'He's here. He must be here.'

'You're in trouble, I suppose? Want to borrow money?'

'No, no, no. Look, could you call the Consul and tell him that Telemachus insists on seing Sir David Pearce. Just tell him that.'

'I'll try his secretary,' she said, with a sniff.

Adrian tapped the desk with his fingers.

'Hello, Mitzi? It's Dinah at the front desk. Have a young gentleman here who says he wants to see a Sir David Pearce. I told him we . . . oh . . . I'll ask him.'

The receptionist favoured Adrian with a combative scowl.

'What was that name again, please?'

'Oh, Healey. Adrian Healey.'

'That's not what you said.'

'Never mind, just say Adrian Healey.'

'Mitzi? He says Adrian Healey . . . yes, I'll hold.'

She turned to Adrian again. 'Could you not do that?'

Adrian smiled. His fingers stopped tapping against the desk.

'Yes, dear? All right. You'll send someone down will you?'

'Everything all right?' Adrian asked.

'You're to wait. Chair over there.'

The words had hardly left her lips before Adrian heard a door closing upstairs and footsteps descending the stairs. A greasy-haired man in a powder-blue safari suit bounded towards him with hand outstretched.

'Adrian Healey?'

'We've met before, I think,' Adrian said. 'On the Stuttgart to Karlsruhe Autobahn.'

'Dickon Lister. Simply delighted. Come on up, why don't you?'

Adrian followed Lister up the central staircase and into a vast reception room. Sitting on a sofa, hunched over a small radio set, an earpiece plugged into his left ear, was a man in a Savile Row suit and St Matthew's College tie. Dickon Lister winked at Adrian and left the room.

'Hello, Uncle David.'

'It's unbelievable, Adrian, simply unbelievable!'

'I really don't see how . . .'

Uncle David waved him to silence.

'That's it! That must be it. Lillee has gone, that must be it.'

'What 'Haven't you heard? Headingley, man! Botham and Dilley put on one hundred and seventeen for the eighth wicket yesterday.

Simply unbelievable. And now . . .' He clapped his thighs ecstatically. 'You won't believe this, Adrian, but Australia needed only one hundred and thirty to win today and they went from fifty-six for one to seventy-five for eight. Willis has run through them like a tornado. What? No . . . Chilly, you cunt!'

'What is it?'

'Chris Old has just dropped Bright. Wake up man!' he boomed at the radio. 'It was five hundred to one against an England victory in the betting tent today, can you credit it?

And if it wasn't for you and your bloody Trefusis I'd be up there now watching the most exciting Test Match in history.

But oh no . . .'

He relapsed into silence again, wincing and grimacing at the radio.

Adrian settled himself on the edge of the sofa and stared into the empty fireplace. He could hear a faint hiss from Uncle David's earpiece. A clock ticked slowly on the mantelpiece.

Adrian felt the same molten surge of guilt in his stomach he had felt so often in the past. He could not for anything imagine the outcome of the next twenty-four hours, but he knew that it would be dreadful. Simply dreadful.

Finally Uncle David let out a great roar.

'That's it, that's it! Willis has taken eight for forty-three!

England have won! Ha, ha! Come on, my boy, cheer up! Let's get Dickon to bring us in some champagne, what do you say?'

'I think you should read this first.'

'What is it?' Uncle David took the envelope. 'A demand for more money, Ade?'

Adrian watched Uncle David's face, as he read the letter through, change from benign indifference to irritation, anxiety and anger.

'Damn him! Damn him to Spitzburg in a cork-bottomed raft.

Where is he now?'

'Osterreichischer Hof.'

'With Pollux?'

'No,' said Adrian. 'The thing is Pollux was dead when we got there. His throat had been . . . you know . . . like Moltaj.'

'Shitty damn. Police?'

'Not yet. There was a waiter though, so I suppose . . .'

'Doublefuck, hell and arse-tits. Lister! Where the hell is that man when you need him? Lister! T 'Sir?'

'Get on to Dun woody at Vienna. Tell him to fix the Salzburg Polizei soon, sooner, soonest. Pollux has been bollocksed in the Osterreichischer Hof. Suite?' He clicked his fingers at Adrian.

'Come on boy! Suite? Room number!'

'Franz-Josef it was called, I think,' said Adrian. And don't call me sweet, he added to himself.

'You think? Was it or wasn't it?' Uncle David shook him by the shoulders.

'Yes!' shouted Adrian. 'The Franz-Josef.'

'Got that Lister? Full diplo tarpaulin over the whole farting mess. And a car for me and laughing boy here to be at the Goldener Hirsch by six o'clock this pip emma. You'd better come along as well.'

'Armed?'

'No,' said Adrian.

Uncle David's right hand slammed lazily into the side of Adrian's face.

'Don't give orders to my men, Ade, there's a dear.'

'Right,' said Adrian, sitting down on the edge of the sofa.

'I'm sorry.' Uncle David's signet-ring had caught the flesh above his left eyebrow and he blinked as a drop of blood oozed into his eye. The blinking only caused the blood to sting his eyes more, so tears sprang up to wash it away.

Uncle David nodded to Lister.

'Armed,' he said, 'and ever so slightly dangerous.'





Twelve

At one end of the Schubert Banqueting Room at the Goldener Hirsch Hotel a small platform had been arranged on which stood a chair and a table. On the table were set a gavel, a medicine bottle of purple liquid, a metal waste-paper bin, a box of matches, two small radio sets and a pair of headphones. The chair was set to one side, facing out into the rest of the room. Behind the stage a grey curtain obscured the back wall, trimly pleated like a schoolgirl's skirt. The impression given might have been that of a village hall in Kent preparing to host a Women's Institute lecture. Only the tondo portrait of Franz Schubert who gazed down at the room over round spectacles with an affable, academic and Pickwickian air and the collection of antlers distributed on the walls betrayed the Austrian bloodlines of the setting.

A cluster of people stood against the tall window at one side and twittered quietly to each other like shy early arrivals at a suburban orgy. Humphrey Biffen, white-haired and awkwardly tall, stooped like an attentive stork to hear his son-in-law Simon Hesketh-Harvey relate the details of the extraordinary cricket match that had taken place earlier that day in Yorkshire. Lady Helen Biffen was clucking sympathetically at a pale young man with red-rimmed eyes. Amidst them bustled Trefusis with a bottle of Eiswein.

At precisely the moment a gilt and porcelain clock on a plaster corbel by the window chimed six o'clock with dainty Austrian insistence, Sir David Pearce strode in, followed by a smiling Dickon Lister and an ovine Adrian.

Pearce looked about him, failing quite to conceal his satisfaction at the silence his arrival had caused to descend on the room.

His manufactured angry glance flashed across at Biffen and his son-in-law, then back to Trefusis who was hurrying forward with three glasses and a bottle.

'Donald, you old barrel of piss!' barked Sir David. 'What are you doing with my man Hesketh-Harvey?'

'Ah, David. Prompt almost to the second! So grateful, so grateful.'

Trefusis proffered Lister a glass, blinking up at him.

'Have we . . .?'

'Lister, Professor. How do you do?'

'If you take hold of these two glasses, Adrian, then I can pour.'

Trefusis looked enquiringly at the swelling over Adrian's eye.

Adrian inclined his head minimally towards Pearce and twisted his own ring-finger to indicate the cause of the cut. Trefusis bobbed with comprehension and began gingerly to pour the wine.

'I think you'll like this, Mr Lister... oh dear, "Mr Lister"!

How inelegant of me. That's worse than "Lord Claude" isn't it?

Or "Professor Lesser", come to that. This is called Eiswein, by the way. Are you familiar with it?'

'Ice vine?'

'Eiswein, yes.' Adrian watched with amusement the light of lecture come into Trefusis's eyes as he backed Lister into a corner and began to preach. 'They allow, you know, the full effects of the pourriture noble, or Edelfaule as they call it here, to take effect on the grape, such that the fruit simply glistens with rot and sugar. They then take the most audacious risk. They leave the grape on the vine and await the first frost. Sometimes, of course, the frost comes too late arid the fruit has withered; sometimes too early - before it is yet fully purulent with botrytis. But when, as in this vintage, the conditions concatenate ideally, the result is - I'm sure you'll agree - vivid and appealing. One's sweet tooth returns with age, you know.'

Lister sipped his wine with every evidence of appreciation.

Trefusis poured a glass for Sir David and one for Adrian. The overpowering bouquet of thick, honeyed grape almost made Adrian, his head still buzzing from the blow he had received from Uncle David, his mind still dizzy with apprehension, swoon. As he blinked and steadied himself, his focusing eyes met the sad, solemn gaze of Humphrey Biffen who smiled sweetly from the corner and looked away.

'Hum ho,' said Trefusis. 'I am supposing that we had better proceed. Adrian, I wonder if you wouldn't mind accompanying me to the dais?'

Adrian drained his wine-glass, handed it with what he hoped was a flourish to Dickon Lister and followed Trefusis to the platform. He could not rid himself of the suspicion that this whole charade had been rigged to expose him. But exposure as what, to whom or to what end, he could not for the life of him figure out.

'If you would sit here,' said Trefusis indicating the single chair. 'I think we might be ready to bully off.'

Facing his audience like a conjuror's stooge, with Trefusis behind him at his prop-table, Adrian looked down at his shoes to avoid the stare of expectant faces that were turned towards him. Enticing sounds floated up through the window from the central courtyard bar below; the prattle of drinkers; tinkles of ice and glasses and laughter; a horn concerto by that same Mozart who was born three and half centuries after this hotel had been built and almost exactly two centuries before Adrian had gulped his first lungful of air. The funeral march of Siegfried would have suited his mood better than this foolishly exuberant gallop.

Behind him Trefusis cleared his throat. 'If I might have everyone's attention . . .?'

An unnecessary request, thought Adrian. Every eye in the room was already fixed firmly on the stage.

'Do sit down, everyone, I beg. There are chairs for all. So!

That is much better.' Lister had ignored Trefusis's invitation to be seated and stood in the doorway with his legs apart. Whether he imagined he was deterring entrance or egress, Adrian could not decide.

'Perhaps I can prevail upon you to lock the door, Mr Lister . . . ah, I see that you have already done so. Excellent! Now then, I think we all know Adrian Healey. He is Sir David Pearce's nephew, on the distaff. Sir David, of course, is a well-known servant of the government, by which I mean he is not well-known at all, for his department is a clandestine one. His assistant Dickon Lister you see guarding the doorway like Cerberus. They, on behalf of their government, are most interested in a system devised by my friend Bela Szabo. Sir David as an old tutee of mine from university has long known of my association with Szabo, whose distinguished grandson, Grandmaster Stefan Szabo, is with us today.'

Adrian looked at the young man with eyes fresh from weeping who sat between Biffen and Lady Helen. Nothing in the shape of his head or the set of his expression indicated anything of the abstract or logical genius that marked out the chess champion.

A rather ordinary, innocent looking fellow. But sad: very, very sad.

'I had hoped that Bela's other grandson, Martin, would be with us too. As I think you all know he was killed today.'

Five sets of eyes bored into Adrian, who coloured and looked down again.

'Also with us are Humphrey Biffen and his wife Lady Helen, old friends and colleagues of Bela and myself. Their son-in-law, Simon Hesketh-Harvey, is here too. As it falls out Simon works in the same department as Sir David.'

'Or at least did until six o'clock this evening,' growled Sir David. 'I'll have your arse for a plate-rack, Hesketh-Harvey.'

'But then of course Simon and Mr Lister are not the only people to have been in your employ, are they, Sir David? I believe I am right in saying that young Master Healey here has been drawing a stipend from you for the last two years at least.'

Adrian closed his eyes and tried to concentrate on Mozart.

'But let us get things in order. Two years ago, Szabo, when still an obedient Hungarian scientist, had been to Salzburg for a conference. There he had hidden papers relating to his Mendax machine. And not a moment too soon. Six months following his return to Budapest, the Hungarian authorities had found out about his work and were demanding to be shown the fruits of it. Your department, David, had heard of Mendax too and became determined that Britain must certainly do its best to gain possession of so intriguing a device - if only as a means of impressing your American confreres. The world had just learnt about poor dear Anthony Blunt, we must remember, and I am sure there must have been an overwhelming desire within your Service to win gorgeous trophies to lay before the feet of your betters. You supposed that were Szabo to try to dispose of Mendax then I, as his oldest friend outside Hungary, would in some manner be involved.'

'And so you were, old love.'

'It is true that Szabo sent me a letter last year. He wrote of his wish for me to collect the documents he had hidden in Salzburg. I was requested to be at Mozart's Geburtshaus at two p.m. on the seventh of July where a contact would be awaiting me by a diorama of the supper scene from Don Giovanni. I have no doubt you intercepted this letter to me, Sir David. Quite right too, I don't complain of that.'

'Too bloody bad if you did, Professor.'

'Neatly put. So, what happened next? Well, Adrian, the eyes and ears of Sir David Pearce, accompanied me to the rendezvous. My contact at the Geburtshaus was to be a friend of Szabo's named Istvan Moltaj, a violinist officially present in Salzburg for the Festival. So far so splendid.'

'So far so obvious.'

'Well, now to something rather less obvious perhaps.'

Adrian wondered why this meeting seemed to be developing into a public dialogue between Donald and Uncle David.

'I wonder if you have ever heard, Sir David, of Walton's Third Law?'

'No matter how much you shake it, the last drop always runs down your leg?'

'Not quite. It was a wartime SIS convention. If a meeting is set up and a time for it given in the twelve-hour clock - using an a.m. or p.m. suffix - then the meeting is understood to be called for a time thirty-three minutes earlier than that designated. What Adrian would call tradecraft, I believe. Accordingly Moltaj met me not at two p.m. on the appointed day, but at one twenty-seven p.m. At this meeting he told me where to find the Mendax papers. They were to be collected by me from the reception desk here at the Goldener Hirsch. Moments after imparting this information, Moltaj's throat was cut by someone, I must assume, who was blessedly unfamiliar with Walton's Third Law. A few days later, your man Lister, acting, I have no doubt, on information received from Adrian, made a rather vulgar attempt to relieve me of the papers in an Autobahn lay-by in West Germany.'

Sir David leant back in his chair and looked round at Lister, still standing in the doorway. 'Were you vulgar, Lister? I'm sorry to hear that. See me afterwards.'

'Vulgar and unsuccessful. I had left the papers here. I knew perfectly well that Adrian was not to be trusted. That is why I ensured that he was always by my side. Was it not Don Corleone who kept his friends close, but his enemies closer?

How could Don Trefusis do less?'

Adrian opened his mouth to speak, but decided against it.

'The technical data on Mendax were securely locked in the safe here at the hotel. But Szabo had also built a working Mendax machine, which he had split into two and entrusted to his grandsons, Stefan and poor Martin. Stefan smuggled out his half in a radio set belonging to another member of his chess delegation and presented it to me in a Cambridge public lavatory a fortnight ago. Martin was to have given me the other half this afternoon in the Hotel Osterreichischer Hof, but his throat was cut before he was able to do so. It seems that by this time the killer had worked out how Walton's Third Law operated. That, my dears, is the brief history of Szabo's attempt to get Mendax to me. Does anyone have any questions?'

'If you had left the entire business to us, Tre-blasted-fusis, this whole sordid shambles would have been avoided,' said Sir David.

'I wonder. A problem that has been exercising me mightily is the killing of Moltaj. He was an innocent musician delivering a message for a friend. We have no reason to imagine that he knew about Mendax, no grounds for supposing that he presented a threat to anyone. The Hungarians are not nowadays noted for their savagery in these matters - unlike the East Germans or the British. What conceivable ends could the death of Moltaj serve? It seems to me that this is far from being a trivial issue.'

Trefusis lit a cigarette and allowed the import of his question to sink in. Adrian had done with his inspection of the floor and had now started on the ceiling. He tried to believe that he was a thousand miles and years away.

'Well, we will return to the "Why" later,' said Trefusis. 'The "Who" is interesting also. I saw the killer, as it happens. A very fat man with lank hair and a small head.'

'Who cares?' said Pearce. 'Some bloody Hungo knife artist.

Probably halfway across Czecho by now.'

'I think not-o, David-o.'

Sir David put his hands behind his head. 'Donald, give me listen. If you press that wonderful mind of yours into service you will find, after due stock-taking, adding up, taking away, knitting, purling and tacking, that the score is one and a half to half in your favour. You are in possession of the technical bumf and the one half of the machine that your chess-playing friend Castor here gave you in your bog in Cambridge. That's the major haul, old darling. The other half, which the Hungoes got ahold of this afternoon, is n.f.g. without the book of words that you have so cunningly kept clasped to your sagging bosom.

You're ahead of the game. Give your winnings to us like a good boy and expect a knighthood by return of post. Failing that, shove it on the open market and make yourself a millionaire.

But don't fucking horse around with us. We're busy men. You follow me?'

'Now why should you think that I have only the one half of Mendax?'

'Donny dear, you just said, did you not, that the knife artist got to Pollux before you? I take it he didn't kill him just for the fun of it - saving your grief, young Stefan.'

'No, as it happens you are right.' Trefusis picked up the medicine bottle from the table and unscrewed the lid. 'The lining of Martin's coat had been ripped open. I am forced to assume that something was taken.'

'There you are then, so why don't you . . . what the Nigel Christ?'

Trefusis was pouring the purple contents of the bottle into the waste-paper bin on the table in front of him.

'A little prestidigitation to entertain you,' said Trefusis. He struck a match and dropped it into the bin. A great ball of blue and green flame blossomed upwards up for an instant and then shrank away into thick smoke.

'And so we say farewell to Bela's Mendax papers,' said Trefusis.

'You great flapping clitoris,' said Sir David. 'You pointless, fatuous, drivelling old man. What the hell do you think you're playing at?'

'I know what's worrying you, David, but you may rest easy.

The smoke alarm has been disconnected. I saw to it earlier this evening.'

'Of course you realise now that you can kiss goodbye to any chance you ever had of getting onto the BBC Board of Governors, don't you?'

'I had no idea I was in the running.'

'All you're in the running for now, matey, is ten years of tax inspectors waking you up at dawn twice a week and policemen stopping your car four times for every two miles you drive.'

'Don't be dismal, David,' said Trefusis. 'I have merely eliminated the vigorish. The game is now even. I have one half of Mendax, while the killer would appear to have the other.'

'Damn you to Hull and all points north.'

'Well, possibly. For the meantime, however, perhaps young Simon can help us out with the identity of this knife artist, if that really is the current jargon. Who is the Hungarians' best assassin, Simon? Not your desk I know, but you've worked there.'

'The artist they like to use is actually a German, sir. Sets up his stall under the name of Alberich Golka.'

'I see. And is this man, I wonder, fat at all?'

'Very fat, sir. That's about the only thing we know about him. He's fat, he's German and he's very expensive.'

'So this costly, full-figured Teuton was employed by the Hungarians to intercept Mendax and, it seems, to kill anyone remotely connected with it. I return to my original question.

Why? Why kill Moltaj?'

'Well, sir, it's what killers do. They kill.'

'Only to order. Why order this Golka to kill an innocent violinist?'

Simon shrugged politely; Humphrey and Lady Helen shifted themselves into a more upright position, like churchgoers demonstrating their attentiveness to a sermon; Sir David Pearce yawned; Stefan gazed forlornly out of the window and Dickon Lister continued to bar the door. Adrian wondered when attention was going to be paid to him.

'I ask myself,' said Trefusis, 'why people are ever murdered.

They are murdered for reasons of revenge, retribution and rage.

They are murdered as a means of winning secrecy and silence, they are murdered to satiate a psychotic lust and/or to achieve a material gain. None of these grounds satisfactorily explains the immense expenditure of monies and risk that was involved in putting a period to the existence of a harmless Hungarian fiddler. Consider too the manner of the murder. So grisly, so public, so violent, so uncomely.'

'Perhaps the killer didn't like his face,' suggested Pearce.

'Oh, but it was a lovely face. No, there is only one motive that strikes me as necessary and sufficient. Moltaj's murder was directed at/we.'

'Golka mistook him for you, sir? That's hardly . . .'

'No, no, Simon. I meant precisely what I said. Moltaj was murdered at me, to frighten me.'

Sir David rose, stretched and made his way to the sideboard.

'More of this wine anyone?' he called out to no one in particular.

'Yes please,' said Adrian.

Sir David ignored him, poured himself a glass and resumed his seat. Adrian flushed and scrutinised his shoe-laces.

'I believe,' continued Trefusis, 'that the killing of Moltaj was designed to impress upon me the savage and remorseless lengths to which the Hungarians were prepared to go in order to acquire Mendax. If they mean to kill for it, I was supposed to say to myself, then I had better let them have it at once. But what a footling statagem! I am not, I hope, so old and feeble an old quiz as all that. If I was truly scared - and I must pause here to assure you that indeed I was as pitifully afraid as ever I have been - then surely the natural course of action for me to have taken would have been to deliver the Mendax papers to Sir David and to rely on his department for protection. The Hungarians are not the kind to set murderers on one's tail simply to exact revenge. They are not MI5, for heaven's sake.

Then again, nor are they such idiots as to imagine that they could ever panic me into giving Mendax to them, they could only panic me into giving it to my own people. That is when I realised, of course, that this is precisely what was intended. I was meant to be cowed into presenting Mendax not to the Hungarians, but to Sir David Pearce. Sir David Pearce had been running Golka. Sir David Pearce had ordered the death of Moltaj as a means of frightening me out of the game and Sir David Pearce had ordered the identical death of Martin Szabo that he might maintain his fiction of bloodthirsty Hungarians running riot throughout Salzburg.'

Til call for a nurse,' said Sir David. 'You lot keep him talking.

And for God's sake humour the poor bastard before he turns violent.'

Trefusis dipped his head sorrowfully. 'No, David, I don't think anyone will be calling for nurses. Not just now.'

Sir David met the stares of the others in silence and then burst into laughter.

'Oh for God's sake, look at you all! You can't possibly be serious! The man's babbling and you know it.'

'Perhaps we should ask Golka,' said Trefusis.

'Ooh, yes, what a good idea. Let's ask Golka. Or Florence Nightingale perhaps, or the Nabob of Bhandipur.'

'Well, Golka?' said Trefusis. 'You are the one who did the killing. Perhaps you could tell us on whose orders?'

Lister did not alter his expression at all. He shifted his weight from his right to his left leg and remained silent.

Adrian felt his gut churning. Ten minutes ago he had not imagined getting out of this session with his integrity unscathed, now he was beginning to doubt that he would get out of it alive.

Simon Hesketh-Harvey coughed and raised a tentative hand.

'Um, excuse me, sir. I hate to seem dim, but are you suggesting that Lister is Golka?'

'Oh, there can be no doubt of that. I recognise him, you see.'

'Mm. He's... not very fat though, is he, sir?'

'Well of course not. Such a noticeable thing to be, isn't it, fat?

Far from ideal, one might therefore think, for the successful pursuit of the dreadful trade Golka has chosen. But you see, while a fat man can never make himself thin, a thin man may easily make himself fat.'

'Padding, do you mean, sir?'

'Quite. His face might not properly match the corpulence of his body, but it is not uncommon, after all, to see men who are fatter in frame than in feature. Is that not right, Mr Lister?'

Lister said nothing.

Adrian stared at him, trying to picture where on his person a gun might be concealed. Or his knives.

'Are you absolutely certain, sir? I mean . . .'

'Oh for God's sake!' exploded Sir David, his voice setting the bells of the gilt and porcelain clock on the wall to chime. 'You work to me Hesketh-Pisshead-Harvey! You sir me, do you understand? You do not sir this sack of rotting tweed. You sir me!'

Simon did not turn to look at Pearce during this outburst. 'As you say, sir,' he said stolidly. 'You are suggesting then, Professor, that in order to acquire Mendax, Sir David hired Golka?'

'Yes, because he has been operating privately, I think. He wants Mendax for himself. A supplement to the nugatory pension he might expect from his masters. If he had succeeded in frightening me into offering Mendax to Her Majesty's Government, he would have made sure, I have no doubt, that Golka crashed the handover and took Mendax away, apparently from the both of us. It had to look like the Hungarians had won, you understand.'

'This is so stupid of you, Donald,' said Sir David. 'So very stupid. You see, if your analysis is correct, I already have one half of Mendax, the half that Lister took from Martin this afternoon. It seems natural that I should trouble you for the other half.'

'Oh but you don't have one half of Mendax, David. That is the whole point. I have both halves.' Trefusis looked down at the two radio sets on the table in front of him.

Adrian watched as Uncle David's eyes froze into a momentary stare of panic before slowly relaxing into a smile.

'Bad bluff, Donald. V. bad bluff.'

'I am afraid not. You see, there is something else of which you and Lister or Golka - whichever he prefers - are in ignorance. Walton's First Law.'

'Oh hell!' said Humphrey Biffen suddenly.

Everyone turned to stare at him.

'Ever since you mentioned the Third Law I've been sitting here racking my brains trying to remember the others,' said Biffen with an apologetic shake of the head. 'I remember Two and Four of course, but what on earth was One?'

'Oh come on, Humpty!' his wife nudged him playfully, ' "Whatever is on the person is not true. k' How could you forget?'

'Oh yes!' cried Biffen with satisfaction. 'I am an old fool. So sorry, Donald.'

'My dear fellow, not at all. Lady Helen is of course quite right. "Whatever is on the person is not true." I wonder, Sir David, if you ever listen to the little wireless essays with which from time to time I infest the air waves? They may be heard domestically every Saturday morning on Radio 4. They are also broadcast around the globe by the BBC World Service.'

'I know that. Anyone who's ever tried to listen to the cricket knows that. To their bored cost.'

'Ah, then it is possible that you heard this week's essay? It was transmitted in Europe this morning at oh three hundred hours and again at fifteen hundred this afternoon.'

'Yes, I heard it,' said Sir David. 'By God, this had better be leading somewhere.'

'Indeed it is. You might recall a reference to a chaffinch in my piece. Chaffinch is my name for Martin Szabo. Stefan here is Coaltit, I am Bald Eagle, Adrian is Lyre Bird.'

Adrian blushed again. Why 'Liar Bird'? It didn't seem fair.

'And you, Sir David,' continued Trefusis, 'are Duvet, I don't know why, but you are. I hope that doesn't upset you.'

'I've been called worse things.'

'Oh, surely not?'

'Just get on with it, will you?'

'Very well. In this same broadcast I also uttered these words... let me see . . . the sentence went like this . . . "reminded me at first of a copy of Izaac Walton's Compleat Angler that I have in my possession". Yes, I think that was it. This was an instruction to Martin to obey Walton's First Law: Whatever is on the person is not true. "Reminded me at first of a copy of Izaac Walton's . . ."I knew, you see, that if you or Golka did intercept Martin you would expect to find your treasure in the lining of his coat. In his last interview with his grandson in Hungary, Szabo had deliberately told Martin that this was where Mendax should be secreted. Ychir department's man in Budapest has a contact inside the Hungarian secret police.

Simon tells me he is called "Locksmith". "What you want will be in the lining of Martin Szabo's jacket," Locksmith no doubt signalled to London, as Bela intended him to. You briefed Golka accordingly: "Expect to find Mendax in the lining of Pollux's coat," you will have said. Martin did indeed create an inner pocket to his jacket in which he hid a piece of microcircuitry.

This Lister gratefully took after he had cut the poor boy's throat. I believe you will discover that what you killed that boy to obtain controls the spin cycle of a tumble drier. The wireless set on Martin's dressing table would have yielded a much richer secret. I have it here.'

Trefusis held up the second of the two radios.

'There we have it, you see. Mendax. I know how badly you want it, David, and I am so terribly sorry that I am not in a position to oblige you. Humphrey and Lady Helen, like myself, are old friends of Bela Szabo and we feel that we have the prior claim. Simon's loyalty, naturally, is to his parents-in-law and to me, the devoted godfather of his wife Nancy. Stefan here, as Bela's heir and the brother of Martin, whom you so pitilessly slew, must decide on what punishment should be meted out to you. Lister, I'm afraid, cannot be allowed to live.'

Sir David rose to his feet. 'This has all been most instructive,' he said. 'A tidy operation on your part, Donald. I congratulate you. I must now ask you to present Mendax to me. Mr Lister, if you please.'

Adrian watched as Lister's right hand went slowly to his left side and brought out, from under the lapel of his powder-blue safari jacket, an automatic revolver. At least Adrian supposed it was an automatic revolver. It was certainly some form of hand gun, and it was pointed very directly at the head of Professor Trefusis. Adrian had imagined that he had a lifetime before him in which to acquire all kinds of facts, including a basic knowledge of firearms, enough for instance to be able to tell the difference between a pistol, a revolver, an automatic or a semiautomatic. But now he was to be killed by one such instrument before he had the chance to find out what it might be.

'Mendax,' said Trefusis with no indication of concern, 'is of course yours to keep or dispose of as you will, Sir David. I have no argument against bullets. But I must ask you to allow me to finish my address. Then you may kill us all, as kill us all you surely must, for I am sure I speak for everyone in this room when I say that I have every intention of informing your political masters of the entirely reprehensible part you have played in this affair.'

'Oh certainly I shall kill you all,' said Sir David. 'With the greatest pleasure in the world I shall kill you all.'

'Naturally. But I cannot allow you to purchase Mendax, even at the bargain price of six bullets, without offering you a demonstration of its prodigious abilities. You cannot be expected to buy a pig in a poke, Sir David . . . sight unseen.

That, after all, is why Adrian is with us here.'

Sir David folded his arms and reflected.

'Very well,' he said. 'If it amuses you.'

'Thank you,' Trefusis bent down over the table. 'Now correct me if I am wrong, Stefan, but I believe that all we need do is connect these two radio sets like so . . .'

Adrian forced his eyes away from the gun in Lister's hand and round towards Trefusis behind him. He had prised open the battery compartments of each radio. From one a ribbon of parallel connecting cable now protruded, ending in a plug. As Trefusis pushed this plug into the battery compartment of the other it snapped home with a soft plastic click. He plugged the headphone jack into one of the radios and looked enquiringly towards Stefan, who was shaking his head.

'Not this, it must be the other. Certainly the other.'

'Thank you, my boy.' Trefusis unplugged the headphones from the first radio and attached them to the minijack socket of the second. 'Two hundred and fifty metres, I think?'

'Sure,' said Stefan. 'You will hear noise.'

Trefusis held the headphones up to one ear and turned the tuning wheel on the first radio set. 'Aha!' he said at length.

'Adrian, if you would be so kind . . .'

Adrian took the headset with trembling hands. He looked up at Trefusis, who returned the gaze affectionately.

'Must be done, my dear,' he said. 'I don't believe you will be harmed in any way.'

As soon as the headphones were over his ears, Adrian felt reassured. A gentle hiss filled his head, foregrounded by brighter, sharper little sounds that were like an aural equivalent of spots in front of the eyes. It was very pleasant, very relaxing; a bath for the brain. He heard too, quite clearly, the real external sound of Trefusis pressing a button on the device behind him. The effect of this was to cause the hiss, and the dancing little sounds in front of it, to be replaced by a wider, deeper hum. Slowly Adrian lost all sensation of physical contact with the world. He knew quite clearly that he was sitting in a chair, but he could not feel which parts of his body were touching it. Somewhere in the centre of this warm, weightless pool of sound hung the voice of Donald Trefusis.

'Tell me how you feel, Adrian.'

Adrian knew how he felt. He knew everything. Suddenly nothing in his mind was mystery; all was open and clear. It was as if he was swimming through the lobes, folds, neurones, synapses, chambers and connectors of his own brain.

'I feel fucking great,' he declared. 'Sort of swimming feeling like the time I had that grass round at Mark's place in Winner Street - that must have been years ago - I can see the outline of Lister's cock the way he's standing there - very badly cut safari suit I suppose - small circumcised as well - and after we had the grass I was really sick all over Mark's duvet - when Uncle David came to stay and I was twelve I found magazines under his bed I remember - that fluff smell under the spare-room bed - I smelt it again when we stayed in the hotel on Wednesday on our way to Salzburg - I had to pretend I knew the difference between grass and resin which I didn't which is pathetic because it's so fucking obvious isn't it - I wish I hadn't taken Uncle David's fucking money - why on earth Donald calls him Duvet - the word for the unit of thermal insulation in duvets is tog -Donald will know where it comes from - come to think of it I haven't had a wank in two days - Lister can't kill us all can he -I mean this is mad completely mad - they might sell KY jelly in a chemist's somewhere in the Getreidegasse - all that blood - if I do die it won't matter anyway because I'm such a cunt I won't notice - Uncle David is listening to me and looking at me as if I was a fish in a tank and I can hear Donald talking to me so I suppose if none of you minds I had better shut up and listen to what he's saying - big helmet but tiny cock - you've hardly said anything Biffo and your wife hasn't said much either - showing through his togs - what are you doing here anyway - I suppose Donald asked you to follow him as well when we were driving here - I'm asking you a question Mr Biffen and you aren't answering - or rather I suppose you are answering because your mouth is opening and closing but I can't hear you — awful white spittle you have in the corners of your mouth - I've just had this gross image of you and Lady Helen snogging can you imagine - someone is telling me to be quiet I can hear them - I think I had better stand up now - no I can't because the headphones would slip off - I mean grass looks like grass and resin doesn't but I thought it was a trap I suppose - Lister wearing padding and looking fat - I wonder if Simon is armed and is going to try and shoot Lister before he can fire at Donald - Lister has heard me say that now and he will probably shoot Simon first just in case - me and my big mouth - can't be an automatic revolver come to think of it doesn't sound right - somebody is still telling me to be quiet - thirty-eight that must be it a thirty-eight

automatic though whether that's thirty-eight millimetres or inches I have no idea - wasn't there someone called Lister at school - Hugo is turning into an alcoholic because of me - it really is a very small cock that Lister has got perhaps that is why he is a killer - if Donald knew all along that I was being paid by Uncle David then he has never liked me and if he has never liked me then perhaps it's just as well Lister is going to shoot us all - do you remember that time when you made me write to Mother Uncle David and I saw Tony Greig - I hope Lister shoots the others first so I can watch - that's disgusting but then I am disgusting I suppose everyone is - I'm so happy - I really like all of you you know that -1 simply must have a fuck before I die there was a girl on the footbridge with simply astonishing tits - Stefan's got quite a cute bum it has to be said oh for God's sake Adrian he's just lost a brother - I don't know why but I like you all but I am glad that we are all going to die and be together - I like you too Uncle David I always - the magazine under your bed was called Lolita wasn't it completely hairless vaginas - I can't imagine how you spell Golka but it is rather an impressive name - I suppose it gets bigger when he's excited -when he's cutting someone's throat probably - as big as a thirty-eight slug I suppose - looks like a slug at the moment - this is an amazing experience -1 probably love Donald - not like Hugo or Jenny - not like wanting to go to bed with him - ha can you imagine that Donald - me going to bed with you - no I don't mean that but I think I love you in every other way and of course you hate me don't you as you should because I am such a cunt - everyone watching me and listening to me and me making a total arse of myself because I can't help it though it's good to get it off my chest - of course it's never going to end because '

'Thank you, Adrian, I think that will do.'

Trefusis pulled off the headphones and the air seemed to scream into Adrian's head with a huge kicking electric shock.

He gasped like a skin diver breaking the surface. He felt Donald's hand on his shoulder and the stares of everyone else in the room piercing him through to the brain. Rocking backwards and forwards in his chair, he buried his head in his hands and began to cry.

Through the close snivel of his weeping he heard re-establish themselves the sounds of the room: the music in the courtyard below, the ticking of the clock and Uncle David's crude heckling.

'What bloody use is this? The boy's done no more than drool and blub like a maniac. I don't need a machine to make him do that. One swift kick in the balls would be enough.'

'I imagine,' said Trefusis, 'that had we left the machine attached for longer, every truth in Adrian's brain would have been disgorged.'

'What a revolting thought.'

Adrian leant back in his chair and opened his eyes.

'May I stand up please?' he asked in a small voice. 'I think my leg may have gone to sleep.'

'Yes, yes, of course. Walk around the room a little, my boy.'

Avoiding the eyes of Stefan, Simon and the Biffens, Adrian stepped down from the dais.

Sir David gave the wide shrug of a man who believes himself to be surrounded by fools. 'Well I dare say it might work,' he said. 'Just leave it where it is and walk away from the table, will you?'

'In a moment, David,' said Trefusis. 'First I have to do this ...'

Trefusis raised the gavel like a benevolent judge and brought it down onto the coupled radios. Splinters of broken plastic flew across the room. Sir David stiffened.

'You're dead, Donald,' he hissed. 'Do it, Dickon!'

'No! No, no, no, no, no!'

With a screech that tore his throat Adrian threw himself at Lister, knocking him to the floor. He fell on him with a roar, banging his head down onto his chest, barking and bellowing into his face.

'I'll kill you! Kill you! I'll kill you!'

He felt the sharp profile of the gun against his stomach, and pressure upwards as Lister's gun hand tried to free itself from the weight of Adrian's body.

Through the background clamour of upraised voices, Adrian thought he heard Simon Hesketh-Harvey shout, 'Pull him off!'

Hands pulled roughly at his shoulders, trying to tug him away. Why the hell didn't they run? Why couldn't they leave him be? What was the point of sacrificing yourself like this if your allies stayed around to watch? This was their chance to flee. Did they want to be killed?

Adrian kicked his knee into Lister's stomach and the gun exploded with a dull boom.

For a second Lister and Adrian stared at each other. Someone, it could have been Uncle David, said, rather impatiently, 'Oh for heaven's sake!'

Adrian felt hot blood surge against his stomach like a.discharge of semen and wondered whether it was his or Lister's.

'Oh shit,' he said as Lister rolled away. 'It's mine.'

'It's not my fault!' someone close to him cried. 'He just . . .'

Adrian's eyeballs slid upwards and he fell forward. 'I'm so sorry,' he said.

As he fell into unconsciousness he thought he heard the voice of Bob, the landlord of the Shoulder of Lamb.

'You silly arse, sir. I had him covered all the time.'

But as Adrian slipped away, Bob's voice, if it had ever been there, tapered and dissolved into the only sound that accompanied Adrian into the darkness, the sound of Trefusis wailing.





Thirteen

Professor Donald Lister's face hung above Adrian like a great white balloon. Adrian forced his eyes wider open and tried to remember who Professor Donald Lister, could be. He had not realised that such a person was.

The balloon moved away and split itself into two, like the dividing of a gigantic cell.

'You should sleep, my boy,' said Trefusis.

'Sleep,' echoed Dickon Lister.

The two new balloons separated and disappeared from Adrian's line of vision.

A little while later he opened his eyes again to find Istvan Moltaj and Martin Szabo gazing down upon him. Their throats were pure and unscarred, their brown eyes round with compassion.

'Very pale, Helen. Is it right he should be so pale?'

'Only to be expected,' said the voice of Lady Helen Biffen.

Adrian smiled. 'Thank you for welcoming me here,' he said.

'I had always known that death would never be the finish. I hope we can stay friends throughout eternity.'

He realised with a flick of annoyance that although he had uttered the words quite plainly they had sounded only inside his head. His lips had not moved nor had his larynx stirred.

Perhaps there was a special technique up here that he would have to master in order to be able to communicate. He dwelt on the possibility for a while and contemplated with drowsy satisfaction the prospect of the infinite time now available to him.

Adrian awoke from his dreams in some discomfort. The bedrom was very familiar. The dressing table at the end of the bed he had seen before only recently. He hauled himself up onto his elbows to get a better view, then yelped in agony as a sharp pain shot through his stomach. Footsteps hurried towards him from a connecting room. As he sank back, spent, the thought came to him that he was in the same suite of the Hotel Osterreichischer Hof that Martin Szabo had stayed in, that he was lying on the very bed that Martin Szabo had sat on when his throat had been cut.

'Adrian, you shouldn't try to move,' said Trefusis.

'No,' said Adrian. 'Sorry.' He closed his eyes in order to concentrate on framing a question but the question eluded him and he fell asleep.

He came round a little later to find Trefusis sitting by his bed.

'Morning, Donald. If it is morning.'

'Yes,' said Trefusis. 'It is morning.'

'I'm alive then?'

'I think we can go that far.'

'What day is it?'

'Wednesday.'

'Wednesday. How long have I been here?'

'No more than a few hours.'

'That's all?' Adrian was surprised. 'They got the bullet out, did they?'

'Bullet? There was no bullet.'

'But I was shot.'

'Yes, you were shot, but there was no bullet.'

Adrian pondered this.

'What's hurting me then?'

'You lost some blood. I should imagine your stomach will be a little sore for a while. The plaster from your dressing will be pulling at your skin.'

'I'm quite hungry.'

'Rudi will bring you something.'

'Good-o,' said Adrian and fell asleep again.

Two days later Adrian sat at the piano in the Franz-Josef Suite and picked his way through Beethoven's Minuet in G. There was a plate of sandwiches and a glass of beer in front of him. His suitcases were assembled in the middle of the room ready to be taken down to reception. He had felt fully fit enough to bear Donald company for the long drive home in the Wolseley but Trefusis had insisted he go by air.

Adrian's stomach was healing very well, the raw little eruptions where the embedded wadding had been picked out with tweezers were capped with fresh scar tissue and he could now touch the long soft tongue of burn-tissue on his left side without wincing.

He closed the piano lid and straightened himself. It was a companionable kind of pain, clean and sharp as Pilsner; a better pain than the crushing leaden ache of guilt he had carried around with him for as long as he could remember.

There was a hearty knock at the door and Simon Hesketh-Harvey came in, followed by a beaming Dickon.

'Grüß Gott,' said Adrian.

'And how's the lad?'

'The lad's fine thank you, Dickon,' said Adrian. 'And looking forward to going home.'

'That's the ticket,' said Simon.

'No,' said Adrian, pulling a travel wallet from his jacket pocket, 'this is.'

A long table had been prepared in the upstairs room of the Shoulder of Lamb. Nigel the barman was serving soup under the vigilant eye of Bob, the landlord. Trefusis sat at one end, with Adrian at his left hand side and Lady Helen Biffen on his right. Martin and Stefan Szabo, Humphrey Biffen, Dickon Lister, Istvan Moltaj and Simon and Nancy Hesketh-Harvey were all present, chattering and laughing with the hysterical bonhomie of businessmen at a Christmas party. There was one empty chair halfway down the table on Lady Helen's side.

'But why did you have to go to such lengths?' Adrian was asking Trefusis. 'I mean why couldn't you just tell me what was going on?'

'It was very necessary, I am afraid, that you acted in complete ignorance of the whole affair. David Pearce was paying you to spy on me after all. You believed you were acting in the interests of his department. That was how it had to remain. We knew he wanted Mendax for himself, not for his country but for his own enrichment. It was expedient that you should be unaware of this.'

'What about Lister? Is he really Golka?'

'Lister used to work as a junior official at the British Council in Bonn. Simon found out that Pearce had inexplicably seconded him to the Consulate in Salzburg. This puzzled Simon.

He picked Lister up and questioned him with some force. Lister is indeed Golka - between ourselves,' said Trefusis, lowering his voice, 'not a very pleasant man, I'm afraid. It became apparent that Sir David was quite prepared to kill for Mendax.

This was wholly unacceptable to us. We made Lister an offer.

He was to keep us informed of Pearce's plans, much as you were keeping Pearce informed of ours, and we would arrange that he need only pretend to kill Moltaj and Martin.'

'As long as I witnessed these killings?'

'Oh yes, that was very necessary. Your description of them to your Uncle David would be of the utmost importance. It had to seem to him that, although he had just failed to get hold of the Mendax papers, he had at least succeeded in getting hold of one half of the device itself. When he knew that I had the rest he would come out into the open and reveal his true motives.'

'There's one thing,' said Adrian. 'When you attached Mendax to me I heard nothing through those headphones but white sound. I felt no compulsion to do anything but fall asleep. All that guff I came out with, it was just a put on. I made it up.'

'Of course!' said Trefusis. 'Haven't you understood it yet?

Mendax doesn't exist.'

'What do you mean?'

'It's a nonsensical notion, absolutely nonsensical. But we had to make Pearce believe it could really work.'

'But you hooked me up to it!'

'That's right.'

'I might have blown the whistle. Simply announced that it wasn't doing anything for me, just hissing in my ear. How could you know that I wouldn't?'

'I relied on the fact that you are a chronic liar. Once you were attached to a device that was supposed to make you tell the truth but didn't work, you would naturally do the dishonest thing and pretend that it did. It was mixture of suggestion on my part and appalling dishonesty on yours. Not that it mattered whether you went through that charming and absurd act or not.

Pearee had shown his hand by this time. I am only sorry that you decided to behave in such a peculiar fashion as to throw yourself at Lister's gun.'

'It was very brave of the poor darling,' said Lady Helen. 'And it was criminally foolish of Lister to have loaded blank charges.

They can be very dangerous.'

'It might have been necessary for him to appear to shoot one of us,' said Trefusis.

'A toast!' cried Simon Hesketh-Harvey. 'To Adrian Healey, saint and hero.'

'Adrian Healey, saint and hero.'

'Thank you,' said Adrian, touched. 'It was nothing, really.'

He beamed around the room. 'So the invention of Mendax was merely a ruse.'

'Some of us,' said Simon Hesketh-Harvey, 'had been entertaining doubts as to Sir David's trustworthiness over a number of years. Donald came up with the idea of Mendax. Over a two-year period he corresponded with Bela on the subject, knowing that Sir David would eventually get to hear of it. An old hand like Donald must expect his mail to be interfered with. He never expected that one of his own students would be set to spy on him, however. That was a tremendous bonus.'

'Steady on,' said Adrian. 'David is my uncle you know. Blood is thicker than water after all.'

'Not thicker than friendship I might have hoped,' said Tre-fusis. 'But there! No recriminations. You acted splendidly.'

Bob, the landlord, leant forward and winked. 'I had a great big gun pointed at Sir David from behind the curtain all the time, Master Adrian, sir.'

'Well, you might have told me,' said Adrian. A wave of tiredness came over him and he gave a huge yawn, the effort pulling at his stomach muscles and reawakening the wound.

Humphrey Biffen must have read the momentary twinge of pain in Adrian's face, for he was instantly on his feet. 'You are still weak, Adrian. One of us should take you back to St Matthew's.'

Adrian rose as steadily as he could. 'That's all right,' he said.

'The walk will clear my head.'

Cambridge in the long vacation had a forlorn, slightly embarrassed appearance, like an empty theatre. It was a warm night.

Adrian looked up at St John's College chapel and at the stars beyond. The soft summer air refreshed him. Perhaps he would not go straight home to bed after all. There was a great deal to think about. In his pocket he had a letter from Jenny. It had awaited him in his pigeon-hole at St Matthew's on his return from Gatwick that afternoon. It seemed that she had got herself a job as an assistant director at Stratford. Adrian crossed the road, sat on the low stone wall opposite the pub and lit a cigarette. He found that the letter could be read both as a farewell and as a plea for his return.

'I cannot decide whether or not you have grown up yet. What is this fantasy world that men inhabit? I don't think there is anything so wonderful about hard-nosed realism or remorseless cynicism, but why must you always revert to type? Have you already become an irretrievable "Enemy of Promise"? I was rereading it the other day. What is that final phrase about all Englishmen . . . that they become "Cowardly, sentimental and in the last analysis homosexual"? It was written fifty years ago for God's sake! It can't still be true can it - after a world war, a social revolution, rock and roll and all the rest?

'I was so in love with you last year. I believed we were the most remarkable couple anywhere. All my friends thought I had it made, that's a terrible phrase I know, but you know what I mean. I don't think you quite believe that women exist. To you they're a kind of difficult boy with surplus flesh in some places and missing flesh in others. I'm not even sure if you ever enjoyed my company, but then I don't know if you ever enjoyed anyone else's either, including your own. I know you hate amateur psychology but there it is.

'"Little girls grow up to be women, little boys grow up to be little boys." I can't believe that our generation is growing up to fulfil all the ridiculous stereotypes. So I'll become an earth mother and you will loll in front of the television watching cricket and Clint, is that it? Then why the years of education?

Why a youth at all? Why read books and try to puzzle things out if it all ends in the same way?

'To you and your kind your youth and upbringing take on this great mystique, the quality of myth. The first twenty years of my life are an open book, school and home, home and school, some friends here, some friends there. To you they are the backdrop to a gigantic world of fantasy to which you have endlessly to return. "Dearest creature, you do not understand . . ."I hear you say, as generations of men have always whined to their women. But that is the point! I do not understand. Nor, even if you had more persuasive powers of exposition than you already do, could you ever make me understand. Because there is nothing to understand. That is what you have to understand.

You grew up, you went to this school and that one, you made these friends and those. It was nothing. The future is a much bigger deal than the past, Adrian, a much bigger deal. Not just because it has babies in it, but because there are better people in it, who are better behaved and more fun to be with; the scenery is better, the weather is better, the rewards and thrills are better. But I really am not sure that you will ever ...'

A commotion coming from the Mitre, the pub next door to the Shoulder of Lamb, caused Adrian to look across the road. Both establishments had reached closing time. The landlord of the Mitre was escorting a boisterous group of drinkers into the street. Nigel, next door in the Shoulder, was locking up for the night. Something higher up caught Adrian's attention. One window of the room upstairs, the private dining room which he had just left, was directly above the street entrance of the pub. Adrian could see the clear silhouette of a man standing with his back to the window. Trefusis proposing a toast, perhaps. He looked harder: No, assuredly not Trefusis.

Adrian waited for the pack of drunken rejects from the Mitre to disperse. They stood jeering boozily outside the pub for what seemed an age before at last shouting and kicking their way towards Magdalene Bridge and out of sight. The street was empty. Adrian crossed over and edged his way round to the alleyway that connected the two pubs. The ground floor of the Shoulder of Lamb was empty. Adrian looked around for a box or beer crate that he could stand on. There was a plastic dustbin in the corner of the alley marked 'Mitre Only!' in white paint, the exclamation mark betraying a whole history of bitter inter-pub rivalry that Adrian had time to find both comic and pitiful.

He edged the bin under the Shoulder's ground floor window and, setting his left leg onto the lid, tried to haul himself up, but the dustbin buckled and he found himself thigh deep in refuse. Pain ripped across his stomach and he gagged at the stench of garbage that rose to his nostrils. It was an abiding mystery to Adrian that all man-made rubbish smelt the same once it had been in a dustbin for any length of time. Trying hard not to breathe, he turned the bin upside down and tested if the base would be more likely to take his weight. It held and Adrian got his foot to the window ledge and straightened himself. His head was now no more than two feet below the level of the first floor window. He heard the voice of Humphrey Biffen.

'I'm still not quite sure how we score this,' he was saying.

'Excuse me?' said a Szabo.

'Well, it's Donald's victory again. No doubt about that,' said Nancy. 'Even if we take Lyre Bird out of the picture altogether. He was, after all, a shared resource. The same result would have been achieved without him. He merely added zest. You have to admit it, you failed to take Walton's Rules into account and you genuinely believed that you held one half of Mendax: you loused up, didn't you, David?'

'Bollocks to the lot of you,' growled the voice of Uncle David. 'Donald changed the game halfway through! Turned it into some half-baked fiction just so that he could put that dandiprat of a nephew of mine over his knee and give him a spanking. A spanking that he richly deserved, I will grant you.'

'Well, that's what gave you half a chance,' said Nancy. 'You were beaten all ends up and you know it.'

'Ha! You wait. Just you watch my smoke. If you're not all excessively nice to me I'll set the next round in Lebanon and then you'll know what's what.'

'What are you going to tell the department?' asked Humphrey.

'Nothing to tell. Wasted a tiny amount of cash on the surveillance of Stefan. A few flights to Salzburg. Activated our man Locksmith in Budapest. An idle bugger who needed a sharp toe up his totsie anyway. No harm done. The world knows you're my Moriarty, Donald. They let me have a fly at you once in a while, to humour the mad dog in me. They're relieved to see that I have a human flaw, is my view of it.'

'And when do you play your next game?' asked the other Szabo.

'We try to make each game run for at least two or three years,' said Trefusis. 'Like any decent real life engagement. We will take the next year off before starting again. David and I are the antagonists and it is up to us to recruit as we please. I nearly always have Humphrey and Helen on my side, and David likes to use Dickon. I am the spy and David the spycatcher.'

'Donald devises the scenario and I have to stop him. Which I did in seventy-four.'

'David is at liberty to use all the facilities of his Service, but at his own risk.'

'And at yours, old love,' said David. 'The fact that you are now branded a dirty lavatory loiterer is some kind of victory for me, I venture to think.'

'That's a point,' said Simon. 'You did nearly get yourself sent to prison, Donald.'

'An unlooked-for occurrence, I admit, but these things lend lustre to the reputation of a fading don, don't you feel?'

'Can't you do something about that, David?' asked Helen. 'A word in the right ear, a review of evidence, a retraction from the arresting officer . . . something?'

'Of course, of course,' Uncle David's voice murmured affably.

'Really David, there's no need . . .'

'When did you start all this please?'

'When the game proper ended,' said David. 'About twenty years ago life in the Service became dull, pompous, sordid and absurd. Bloody good bouillabaisse, Bob.'

'Thank you, sir. Got the trick of it in Marseille.'

'Yum, yum.'

'Tell me a thing,' said Trefusis. 'In the car driving over to Salzburg, Adrian told me what we might call his life story.'

'Oh ah?'

'He told me about you and Helen at school, Humphrey.'

'Yes, he came to a couple of our Friday afternoon teas, didn't he, dear?'

'He told me too, about bumping into you, David, at Lord's in . . . seventy-five or six it must have been.'

'Oh yes, that'll be the Aussie test. I remember. Don't know what he means by "bumping into me" though.'

'No?'

'His parents were going on holiday. Naturally they didn't want the little rat getting under their feet then. Shoved him onto me.'

'He hadn't. . . then . . . run away from home in any way?'

'Good Lord no! That what he told you? No, no. Pretty normal schooling he had as far as I can remember. Got slung out for nobbing half his house and circulating filthy drivel in a school magazine. Couple of years at the local college in Gloucester where he got his "A" levels. Taught at some prepper in Norfolk. Then St Matthew's. Why, tell you something different did he?'

'No, no. That was broadly the story as he told it me. One or two, er . . . embellishments perhaps. A lot of highly entertaining nonsense about Piccadilly and prison and so forth. I'm sure he never intended to be so insulting as to expect me to believe them.'

Adrian's foot slipped on the ledge. Scrabbling wildly to regain his balance, he kicked a toe through the window, knocked the dustbin from under him and fell backwards onto the ground.

Without stopping to see what damage he had caused either to himself or to the window, he picked himself up and ran out into the street.





Fourteen

Adrian brought the tips of his fingers together and smiled gently. The girl's voice continued to read.

'Othello is a tragedy of privacy, a phrase that itself expresses incongruity, for, as with most Shakespearean tragedy, success is achieved by a treatment unsuited to the form. And it is the lack of suiting which makes the theme perennial; the tearing-down of a privacy is a subject which fits our age, as it might fit any age. It lets in chaos, and lets out love.'

'Oh bravo!' cried Adrian. 'Memorably phrased, Shelagh.'

The girl flushed slightly with pleasure. 'You like it Dr Healey?'

'Indeed! I liked it when I first read it . . . phew, let me see . . . must be getting on for ten years ago now... nineteen eighty-one, I'm pretty sure it was . . . and I like it just as much now. If anything age seems to have improved it. John Bayley, Shakespeare and Tragedy, published, unless I'm very much mistaken, by Routledge and Kegan Paul.'

'Oh dear,' the girl flushed again, but not this time with pleasure.

'Too memorably phrased I am afraid, my dear.'

'Thing is . . .'

'I know you are . . . frantically busy. But believe me, I had far rather listen to that good essay than the bad one you would have contrived without Bay ley's help. All's well. I think you will manage to get yourself an adequate degree without my pestering you every fortnight for an essay, don't you?'

'Well '

'Of course you will!' Adrian stood and refilled Shelagh's glass. 'A little more malvoisie for you?'

'Thank you.'

'A smoky volcanic bite that cannot disgust. You act, I believe?'

'Yes . . . that's why I get so behind with work.'

'I don't know why I say "believe" you act, I've seen you in a number of productions. My wife is down from London this weekend, you may have heard of her?'

'Jenny de Woolf, the director? Of course!'

'Then why don't you come round to our house in Trumping-ton this evening and say hello?'

'Really? I'd love to.'

'All right, my dear. Seven o'clock, shall we say?'

'That would be fine. Thanks!'

Adrian watched with approval as the girl gathered her bag and her scarf and made for the door. 'By the way, Shelagh . . .'

She paused enquiringly in the doorway.

'I note,' said Adrian, 'that you are a member of the University Humanist Society.'

She looked back at him with a hint of defiance and suspicion.

'Yes?'

'You take it seriously?'

'Very.'

'You dislike religion perhaps?'

'I loathe religion.'

'Ah, now that is interesting. I think that tonight I shall invite old Trefusis along as well, you'd like him I'm sure, and I know he'll like you. We are currently working on a . . . on a problem that may interest you.'

'Oh?'

'As you may know, the nineties have been nominated the "Decade of Evangelism" by various functionaries culled from the madder wings of the Christian church.'

The girl's mouth wrinkled in comic disgust. 'Don't remind me.'

'We have discovered that behind this weird and pitiable phrase there lies . . .' Adrian broke off. 'Never mind. I'll tell you the rest tonight. Dryden House, Trumpington. Can't miss it.'

The girl looked intrigued. 'Right. I'll see you then, Dr Healey. Er . . . bye then.'

'Goodbye, Shelagh. Oh and Shelagh?'

'Yes?'

'I'd appreciate it if you didn't mention this to anyone for the moment. You'll find out why.'

Adrian looked out of the window and watched the girl hop across the grass of Hawthorn Tree Court. He smiled to himself as he sat at his desk and wrote a short note on a sheet of writing-paper.

'To Bald Eagle. Gingerbread. Informal. I think the game may well be afoot. Love Liar Bird.'

Adrian leant back in his chair, fed the paper into his fax machine and pressed an autodial key. He watched the sheet chug through the machine before crossing to his window again.

On the other side of the court he could make out the figure of an old man through an open window on the first floor. The figure stooped down for a moment and fiddled with something on his desk and then came up bearing a ripped sheet of paper.

He turned in Adrian's direction, flourishing the paper like a Morris dancer waving a handkerchief, and executed a quick little jig.

Adrian laughed and turned back into the room.





Acknowledgements

Donald Trefusis and his Wireless Essays first appeared

on the BBC Radio 4 programme Loose Ends. I should

like to thank the producer Ian Gardhouse, and

the presenter Ned Sherrin, for allowing the Professor

a platform for his ideas and observations.



There is no possibility that this book could ever

have been written without the violent threats and

pitiless blackmail of Sue Freestone of William Heinemann

and Anthony Goff of David Higham Associates.



I'm grateful to my parents for their researches

into Salzburg, to Tim Rice for allowing the quotation

from 'I Don't Know How to Love Him',

to Hugh and Jo Laurie for reading the manuscript

when they had hundreds of better things to do,

and to Jo Foster for everything.





Table of Contents

Cover Page

Title Page

Copyright Page

Dedication

Table of Contents

One

Two

Three

Four

Five

Six

Seven

Eight

Nine

Ten

Eleven

Twelve

Thirteen

Fourteen

Acknowledgements




Also by Stephen Fry


FICTION


The Liar

The Hippopotamus

Making History

The Stars’ Tennis Balls


NON-FICTION


Paperweight

Moab is My Washpot

Rescuing the Spectacled Bear

The Ode Less Travelled: Unlocking the Poet Within

Stephen Fry in America


with Hugh Laurie


A Bit of Fry and Laurie

A Bit More Fry and Laurie

Three Bits of Fry and Laurie

Fry and Laurie Bit No. 4





The Fry Chronicles





STEPHEN FRY





MICHAEL JOSEPH

an imprint of

PENGUIN BOOKS





MICHAEL JOSEPH

Published by the Penguin Group

Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA

Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3

(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)

Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd)

Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road,

Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd)

Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre,

Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 110 017, India

Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand

(a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd)

Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue,

Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

www.penguin.com

First published 2010

Copyright © Stephen Fry, 2010

The moral right of the author has been asserted

All rights reserved

Without limiting the rights under copyright

reserved above, no part of this publication may be

reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system,

or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical,

photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior

written permission of both the copyright owner and

the above publisher of this book

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

ISBN: 978-0-14-196957-2





To M’Coll





Contents


Introduction

C is for C12H22O11 for Cereal, for Candy,

for Caries, for Cavities, for Carbohydrates, for Calories

C is for Cigarettes for Convict, for Cundall,

for Corporal Punishment, for Common Pursuit, for Cessation

1. College to Colleague

Cambridge

College and Class

Chess, Classics, Classical Composers, Curiosity and Cheating

Caledonia 1

Cherubs, Coming Out, Continent

Challenge 1

Corpus Christening

Chariots 1

Caledonia 2

Conveniences

Committees

Cycle

Comedy Colleague, Collaborator and Comrade

Continuity and Clubroom

Comedy Credits

Cooke

Chariots 2

Corpsing Chorus

Cellar Tapes and Celebration

Cheerio, Cambridge

Caledonia 3

2. Comedy

Carry on Capering

Clash of Cultures

Chelsea, Coleherne Clones and Conscience

Colonel and Coltrane

Computer 1

Commercial

Create!

Car

Challenge 2

Cinema

Church and Chekhov

Cockney Capers

Chichester 1

Crises of Confidence

Celebrity

Commercials, Covent Garden, Compact Discs, Cappuccinos and Croissants

Crystal Cube

Columnist

Cryptic in Connecticut

Contortionist

Critics and Couriers

Confirmed Celibate

Characters and the Corporation

Colonel and Mrs Chichester

Computer 2

Conspicuous Consumption

Country Cottages, Cheques, Credit Cards and Classic Cars

Carlton Club Crustiness

Courtly Comedy

Coral Christmas, Cassidy, C4, Clapless Clapham, Cheeky Chappies and Coltrane’s Cock

Clipper Class, Côte Basque and Choreography

C

Acknowledgements

Illustrations

Index





Work is more fun than fun

Noël Coward


I really must stop saying sorry; it doesn’t make things any better or worse. If only I had it in me to be all fierce, fearless and forthright instead of forever sprinkling my discourse with pitiful retractions, apologies and prevarications. It is one of the reasons I could never have been an artist, either of a literary or any other kind. All the true artists I know are uninterested in the opinion of the world and wholly unconcerned with self-explanation. Self-revelation, yes, and often, but never self-explanation. Artists are strong, bloody-minded, difficult and dangerous. Fate, or laziness, or cowardice cast me long ago in the role of entertainer, and that is what I found myself, throughout my twenties, becoming, though at times a fatally over-earnest, over-appeasing one, which is no kind of entertainer at all, of course. Wanting to be liked is often a very unlikeable characteristic. Certainly I don’t like it in myself. But then, there is a lot in myself that I don’t like.

Twelve years ago I wrote a memoir of my childhood and adolescence called Moab is My Washpot, a title that confused no one, so clear, direct and obvious was its meaning and reference. Or perhaps not. The chronology took me up to the time I emerged from prison and managed somehow to get myself accepted into university, which is where this book takes up the story. For the sake of those who have read Moab I don’t mean to go over the same ground. Where I mention events from my past that I covered there I shall append a superscribed obelus, thus: †.

This book picks up the threads and charts the next eight years of my life. Why so many pages for so few years? It was a late adolescence and early manhood crowded with incident, that is one answer. Another is that in every particular I fail Strunk’s Elements of Style or any other manual of ‘good writing’. If a thing can be said in ten words, I may be relied upon to take a hundred to say it. I ought to apologize for that. I ought to go back and ruthlessly prune, pare and extirpate excess growth, but I will not. I like words – strike that, I love words – and while I am fond of the condensed and economical use of them in poetry, in song lyrics, in Twitter, in good journalism and smart advertising, I love the luxuriant profusion and mad scatter of them too. After all, as you will already have noticed, I am the kind of person who writes things like ‘I shall append a superscribed obelus, thus’. If my manner of writing is a self-indulgence that has you grinding your teeth then I am sorry, but I am too old a dog to be taught to bark new tunes.



Between Mama and Papa with a rather long-haired Roger on the right.

I hope you forgive the unedifying sight of my struggle to express some of the truths of my inner self and to measure the distance between the mask of security, ease, confidence and assurance I wear (so easily that its features often lift into a smirk that looks like complacency and smugness) and the real condition of anxiety, self-doubt, self-disgust and fear in which much of my life then and now is lived. It is a life, I suppose, as interesting or as uninteresting as anyone else’s. It is mine and I can do what I like with it, both in the world in the real plane of facts and objects and on the page in the even more real plane of words and subjects. It is not for me to be so cavalier with the lives of others, however. In much of my life from 1977 to 1987 people appear who are known in the public world and to whom I cannot give convincing pseudonyms. If I told you, for example, that at university I met a man called Lew Horrie and that we embarked on a comic career together it might not take great insight or too much Googling on your part to know that I was writing about a real person. It is not for me to go blabbing about his life and loves, personal habits, mannerisms and modes of behaviour, is it? On the other hand, were I simply to say that everyone I met in my journey through life was darling and gorgeous and super and lovely and talented and dazzling and sweet, you would soon enough be arcing streams of hot vomit all over the place and in every probability short-circuiting your eBook reader. I don’t doubt for a minute that my publishers have already made it clear in the small print of the contract I signed with them that I, the author, am responsible for all lawsuits appertaining to, but not restricted to, emetic and bodily fluid damage to electronic reading devices in this and all territories. So I am sailing between the Scylla of protecting the wholly reasonable privacy of friends and colleagues and the Charybdis of causing you, the reader, to sick up. It is a narrow course, and I shall do my best to steer it safely.

These pages deal with some of the C-words that have dominated my life. Before the chronology of the chronicles commences, let me catalogue a couple more Cs. To put you, as it were, in the mood …





C is for C12H22O11


… for Cereal

… for Candy

… for Caries

… for Cavities

… for Carbohydrates

… for Calories

Shades of the prison-house begin to close upon the growing boy

William Wordsworth, ‘Intimations of Mortality’


To care about my body would be to suggest that I had a body worth caring about. Since my earliest years I felt nothing but shame for the useless casing of flesh I inhabit. It couldn’t bowl, bat or catch. It couldn’t dance. It couldn’t ski, dive or leap. When it walked into a bar or club it didn’t attract lustful glares of desire or even faint glances of interest. It had nothing to recommend it beyond its function as a fuel cell for my brain and a dumping ground for toxins that might reward me with rushing highs and reasons to be cheerful. Perhaps it all comes down to breasts. Or the lack of them.

While it is true that I was once a babe I was never, I think, a suckling. I have no memories of being clamped to the nipple and believe myself to have been bottle-fed from the beginning. There are psychologists schooled in this tradition or that, whether Kleinian, Freudian, Adlerian, Jungian or Insertnamehereian I cannot say, who hold that the Tit or Teat issue has a significant, even crucial, bearing on human development. I can’t recall whether the theory suggests it is the denial of mother’s milk or the over-abundant supply of it that stores up problems for later life. Possibly both. A lot of bosom pressed into your face at a tender age and you could grow up with a Russ Meyer or Jonathan Ross breast fixation. Nothing but bottle to suck and you develop a horror of bosoms. Or a propensity towards drink in general. Or perhaps the other way around. All absolute poppywash, of course. False mammary syndrome. There are plenty of brothers and sisters, identical twins even, fed on the same infant diets, who have turned out different in every particular – except the irrelevant one of physical appearance. My brother and sister were treated just as I was in infancy, and we could not be, fortunately for them and the world, less alike. So let us suppose that the vices and weaknesses that I am going to tell you about now are peculiar to me and were bestowed upon me at birth along with the moles on the backs of my legs and the whorls on the pads of my fingers. Which is not to say that I am uniquely alone in the possession of these weaknesses. Far from it. They might almost be called the failings of my generation.



Sister Jo, self, brother Roger.

Once we get beyond milk, whether breast or formula, we move on to the hard stuff. Solid food. Pappy spoonfuls of apple sauce and beef casserole are pushed into us until we can wield cutlery for ourselves. One of the first and most forcible ways in which a child’s character begins to express itself is through its attitude to food. In the late 1950s and early 1960s food meant breakfast cereal and sweets. I was one of the first wave of infants to be exposed to child-targeted advertising. Sugar Puffs were born, as was I, in 1957. That cereal, which no one could pretend had any ambition to be eaten by adults, was represented, a decade before the arrival of the Honey Monster, by a real live bear called Jeremy. He led a busy life being photographed for the carton and filmed for television commercials until he was finally retired into private life, ending up, after a short period at Cromer Zoo, in Campertown, Dundee, where he died peacefully in his sleep in 1990. I visited him at Cromer, the first celebrity I ever saw in the flesh, or in the fur, and believe me, what the A-listingest Hollywood babe or pop idol is to a child now, Jeremy the Bear was to me then. You have to understand the passion, the love, the greed and the need.

Sugar Puffs were pellets of wheat that had been puffed up under heat and coated in a syrupy and slightly sticky fructose and glucose glaze. All you had to do to enjoy their glory was to pour on cold milk. Hot milk was possible for winter days, but it created a soggy bowlful closer to soup than cereal. Besides, hot milk that approached boiling point could form a surface skin, and a skin on milk caused me to vomit. To this day the sight or smell of boiled milk makes me keck and puke. I am put in mind of the cock tales they tell of Cocteau’s cocktail parties. They say that Jean Cocteau, to amuse his friends, could lie back naked on a table and bring himself to full ejaculatory orgasm without touching himself, through the power of imaginative thought alone. I have a similar gift. I can make myself vomit by picturing skin on hot milk, custard or coffee. We can both make hot fluids spit and spurt from our bodies. I can’t but feel that Cocteau’s party piece is always likely to be more in demand than mine.

The breakfast table was where the seeds of my sorrow were sown. I am sure that I am right in locating my first addiction here. Sugar Puffs were the starting link in a chain that would shackle me for most of my life. To begin with, as you might imagine, they were a breakfast habit. But soon I was snacking on them at any time of day until my mother began to sigh at the number of packets she was forced to buy. I would eat the sweet pellets loose from the box. One after the other, without stopping, into the mouth they would go. I was like an American at the cinema with popcorn: eyes glazed, hand rising and falling pack-to-mouth, pack-to-mouth, pack-to-mouth like a machine.

‘Eyes glazed’. Is that important? A child at the breast or bottle has that look. There is a sexual element to such unfocused fixity. Until I was about eight or nine I sucked the first two fingers of my left hand. Almost all the time. While twiddling the hair on the crown of my head with the fingers of the right hand. And always with that glazed, faraway look, with parted lips and laboured breath. Was I giving myself the breast treat that I had been denied? These are dark waters, Watson.

Cereal-packet lists of ingredients and serving suggestions were my literature; thiamine, riboflavin and niacin my mysterious invisible friends. Sold by weight not volume. Contents may have settled during transport. Insert finger under flap and move from side to side. They’re Gr-r-r-r-r-r-r-eat! We like Ricicles, they’re twicicles as nicicles. And so they were. In fact, as I liked to say, they were thricicles as nicicles. Certainly much nicicler than their staid, unsweetened parent, Rice Krispies, the cereal that said, if you listened carefully, Snot, Pickle and Crap. To have Rice Krispies when you could have Ricicles, to have Cornflakes when you could have Frosties. Who could imagine such a dull life? It was like deliberately choosing to watch the news on television or preferring to drink unsweetened tea. I lived for one thing and one thing only. C12H22O11. Perhaps this is why I should have been American, for they have sugar everywhere in the United States. In bread, in bottled water, in beef jerky, pickles, mayonnaise, mustard and salsa. Sugar, sugar, sugar.

My relationship with this beguiling and benighted substance is complicated. I should never have been born if it weren’t for sugar, and yet it came close to killing me too.


I told elsewhere† the story of the role of my mother’s father in bringing sugar to Britain. I latterly found out more as a result of taking part in the BBC’s genealogy programme Who Do You Think You Are? My grandfather Martin Neumann came to Bury St Edmunds (not to praise him) all the way from the land of his birth, which was originally Hungary, although the 1920 Treaty of Trianon later absorbed his home town of Nagysurány into the newly expanded Czechoslovakia. For the purposes of history, however, he was from Hungary. A Hungarian Jew, as he liked to observe, is the only man who can follow you into a revolving door and come out first.

He came to Britain at the invitation of the Ministry of Agriculture in Whitehall, whose more far-sighted functionaries realized that if there was, as seemed increasingly likely, to be another world war the Atlantic would almost certainly be cut off, as it so nearly had been at the height of the German U-boat threat of 1917. The West Indies and Australia would be out of reach, and there would be no sugar for the British cup of tea, a disaster too horrible to contemplate. Britain was entirely without native sugar capacity, its farmers never having grown a single beet, its industrialists never having refined a single ounce. Back in Nagysurány, now Šurany, my grandfather had been the manager of what was then the largest sugar refinery in the world, so he seemed like a natural candidate for British recruitment. In 1925 he and his brother-in-law Robert Jorisch came to build Britain its first sugar beet refinery in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, where it stands to this day, emitting a rich and bitter pong faintly reminiscent of burnt peanut butter. Had Martin and his wife and family remained in Šurany they would, being Jews, have been exterminated in the Nazi death camps, as were his mother, sister, parents-in-law and the dozens of other family members who stayed in Europe. I should never have been born, and the paper or digital display technology that has gone into the production of the book you are now reading with such unalloyed pleasure would have been put to other uses.

So sugar gave me life, but it exacted a price – slavish adherence. Addiction to it and an addiction to addiction in addition.


Sweetened breakfast cereals were one thing, and relatively harmless at that. Weekly boxes of Sugar Puffs, Ricicles and Frosties would be ordered by my mother over the telephone and delivered along with the rest of the groceries by Mr Neil, who always called me ‘young man’ and who drove the van for Riches, the little store in the village of Reepham, which lay some two or three miles away from our home hamlet of Booton. Men like Mr Neil no longer exist; little stores like Riches no longer exist.

As a result of Mr Neil’s weekly deliveries, I could eat almost as much breakfast cereal as I wanted without having to spend any money. My sugar hit was free. Of course it was. Why wouldn’t it be? I was a child who lived in a house where there were always Sugar Puffs in the cupboard. Perfectly normal and natural. All this changed when at the age of seven I was sent to a Gloucestershire preparatory school almost exactly 200 miles from our Norfolk home.

My introductory morning at Stouts Hill, for such was the school’s name, presented the first in what was to be a long line of disappointments. After a night of homesick weeping and lonely hiccupping I had awoken to the bumptious din and frightening mystery of an alien institution going about its daily rites.

‘You! What are you doing? You should be in the refectory,’ a prefect shouted at me as I caromed panic-stricken down random corridors.

‘Please, what’s a refectory?’ A picture of some kind of medieval punishment chamber arose in my terrified mind.

The prefect grabbed me by the shoulders and steered me down a passageway, and down another and finally through a door that led into a long, low dining-room crowded with loudly breakfasting boys sitting on long, shiny oak forms, as benches used to be called. He marched me to one, prised two boys apart, hoisted me up and wedged me into the space between. I sat there blinking with frightened embarrassment. Timidly raising my head, I saw that there was cereal available. Cornflakes or lumpy cooked porridge. Of Sugar Puffs, Frosties and Ricicles there was no sign. I might make the claim that life was never the same again, that trust, faith, hope, belief and confidence died in me that day and that thenceforward melancholy marked me for her own, but perhaps that would be pitching it a touch strong. Nonetheless I was shocked. Was there now to be no sweetness in my life?

The school did have one institution that counter-balanced the troubling deficiencies of the refectory. ‘Tuck’, as you may know, is an old-fashioned English school slang word for sweets. What Americans call candy. While I had encountered sweets before, of course I had, they had usually come in quarter-pound bags scooped from large glass jars in Riches or Reepham Post Office. Pear drops, sherbet lemons, toffee eclairs, humbugs and fruit bonbons: all rather dowdy, respectable and pre-war. The Stouts Hill School Tuck Shop offered wilder excitements in this, the rising golden age of confectionery. Cadbury’s, Fry’s (hurrah!), Rowntree’s, Nestlé’s, Mackintosh’s, Mars and Terry’s were still individual independent manufacturers. From Mackintosh’s came Rolos, Caramac and Toffee Crisp, from Fry’s (hurrah!), Turkish Delight, Crunchie bars and Chocolate Cream. Cadbury’s gave us the Picnic and the Flake as well as their signature Dairy Milk wrapped in delicate purple foil. The Bournville giants were even then preparing to launch within one year of each other the legendary Curly Wurly and the Greatest Chocolate Bar in the History of the World, the Aztec. Nestlé’s meanwhile offered us the Milky Bar and KitKat, Rowntree’s had the Aero, Fruit Pastilles, Fruit Gums, Smarties and Jelly Tots, Mars had the Milky Way, Mars bar, Maltesers and Marathon. Bless my soul! I never noticed till now that the Mars products all began with M. Marathon would many years later be rechristened Snickers, of course (and I would help launch the new name by recording the voice-over for its advertising campaign: if I had known such a thing might happen back then I might well have exploded), just as Mars’ Opal Fruits would one day become Starburst. Doubtless they had their reasons. They also produced Spangles, the square boiled sweet that has become shorthand for just the kind of lazy, overwrought nostalgia in which I am now wallowing. But hang in there if you will; there is a point to all this beyond the mere fevered recitation of brand names.

The Stouts Hill Tuck Shop was open for business on different days for each of the four houses into which the school was divided: Kingfishers, Otters, Wasps and Panthers. I was an Otter, and our tuck day was Thursday. First you queued up for cash. Whatever pocket money your parents had allocated you was kept in trust and doled out in instalments by the master on duty, who recorded the withdrawn sum on your individual page in the pocket-money ledger. As the term wore on I watched in dismay as my capital dwindled away. Desperate letters were written home begging for a ten-shilling note to be sent as soon as possible. ‘Please, Mummy, please. All the other boys have got enough money to last them for ever. Oh please, please, please …’

And so it began.

Glorious as the Stouts Hill Tuck Shop may have been, it was but a John the Baptist to the messianic radiance of the Uley village shop, unworthy to tie its red liquorice bootlaces or lick its sherbet dabs. The little post office and general stores was just half a mile from the school gates, and we would pass in crocodile formation on supervised walks through the village, turning our heads in unison towards its inviting windows like cadets honouring their monarch with an eyes right. On the shelves of that shop gleamed, glistened and twinkled the most exotic, colourful and sugary-sweet treasure I had ever seen or had ever dreamed of. Jamboree Bags. Trebor Refreshers. Fruit Salads and Blackjacks a farthing each (that’s four for one old penny). Foam shrimps. Rice-paper flying saucers filled with sherbet. Swizzels Matlow Twizzlers that fizzed and popped in the mouth like fireworks. Love Hearts. Chewy sour cola bottles and rubbery white milk bottles. Chocolate buttons sprinkled with hundreds and thousands. Strips of Wrigley’s Juicy Fruit and Spearmint, boxes of Chiclets and Pez, loose cubes of Bazooka Joe and packs of Beatles- branded bubblegum, each one with a card inside that offered a picture and priceless biographical information: ‘John hates marmalade but Ringo is very fond of lemon curd!’, ‘George is the tallest Beatle, but only by half an inch!’ and other devastating and valuable secrets, all finished with the exclamation marks that remain a characteristic of fan literature to this day. On other shelves there were gobstoppers, aniseed balls and everlasting strips. Sherbet fountains, dabs and dips. Wine Gums, Wagon Wheels and Walnut Whips. Forgive the accidental rhyming. There was the much-prized Spanish Gold, pouches of yellow waxed paper with a picture of a red galleon on the front packed with strands of shredded coconut browned with chocolate powder to make it look like rolling tobacco. Liquorice curved into a Sherlock Holmes pipe, complete with bowl and stem. White candy cigarettes with red ends and rice-paper-wrapped chocolate cigarettes presented in a fake Chesterfield’s carton.

All the elements were now in place. Sugar. White powder. Tobacco. Desire. Lack of money. The forbidden.

Yes, forbidden. The village shop was out of bounds to all boys. The extra sugariness of the sweets, the blindingly bright cheerfulness of the wrappers and the loutish American informality of chewing-gum and gobstoppers offended the mostly military sensibilities of the staff. The produce was all somehow just a bit vulgar, just a bit … well, frankly just a bit working class. Heaven knows what those same poor schoolmasters would have made of Haribo Starmix or the Kinder Happy Hippo. It is perhaps as well that they predeceased such unpleasantnesses, for I’m sure their hearts would have given out.


Seven years old, 200 miles from home and a deprived addict. There are plenty of stories of children younger than seven who are already full alcoholics or were born addicted to crack cocaine, crystal meth and Red Bull, and I am fully aware that my sugar dependency reads as tame by comparison. The fact of it is an indictment of nothing and a lesson to nobody. Nor is it satisfactorily explicable. I have given you the outline of it but that does not suggest necessary or sufficient cause for so compulsive and all-consuming an addiction. After all, my contemporaries were subjected to the same advertising, had available the same cereals, candies and comestibles and were compounded of the same organs, senses and dimensions. Yet from my very earliest consciousness I sensed with savage unswervable certainty that other people were not seized by the same rapacious greed, insatiable hunger, overmastering desire, shivering lust and terrible, hurting need that had me in its grip almost every hour of every day. Or if they were they had levels of self-control that entirely shamed me. Perhaps, I wondered, perhaps everyone but me was strong, characterful and morally assured. Perhaps only I was so weak as to succumb to appetites that others could control. Perhaps everyone else was equally gnawed by equally keen desires, but had been granted by nature or the almighty an ability to master their emotions that in my trembling desolation I had been denied. We should consider that the atmosphere of my school, like that of any given private school in those days (and many today) quivered with righteous religiosity (today’s schools quiver with righteousness without the religiosity, which is only just an improvement). You might be able to imagine then something of the spiritual torture that accompanied my more corporeal agonies. The Bible is crammed from end to end with stories of temptation, interdiction and chastisement. A forbidden fruit hangs from a tree on the very first page, and as we go through we are given more terrible lessons on how greed is punished and lust accursed until we reach the full, final and insane damnations and ecstasies of St John’s Revelations, having passed through wildernesses and desert trials, locusts, honey, manna, ravens, sores, boils, plagues, scourges, tribulations and sacrifices. Lead us not into temptation. Get thee behind me, Satan. Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, I will repay.

In such an atmosphere, with a physiological craving already in place, it is little wonder that guilty connections came to be made in my mind between sugar and desire and satisfaction and desire and satisfaction and shame. All this years before the even fiercer terrors and torments of sex were to make themselves known to me and carve in my heart and bowels the same pattern; gouging it, of course, with deeper and crueller cuts. I say, I am a self-dramatizer, aren’t I?

Since 90 per cent of my schoolfellows appeared immune to all this trauma, introspection, shame and temptation I still wonder, looking back, whether I was especially weak, especially sensitive or especially sensual.

To pay for sweets I stole from shops, from the school and, most shamefully of all, from other boys. These acts of theft were conducted, like the eating, in an almost trance-like state. Shallow of breath, eyes glazed over, I would ransack the changing rooms and desks, my insides churning with fear, elation, dread and passionate self-disgust. At night I would raid the school kitchens, homing in on a cupboard in which were stored great catering-sized blocks of raw jelly that I tore with my teeth, like a lion tearing an antelope.

I chronicled in Moab the occasion when I was found by a prefect to be in possession of contraband sweets, bubblegum and sherbet fountains that could only have come from the village shop.† I persuaded a good-natured little fellow called Bunce, who quietly hero-worshipped me, to take the rap. I had been guilty of so many prior transgressions that one more would result in a severe caning, whereas Bunce, who had no form and no record, would be let off with a warning. It all backfired, of course, and the headmaster saw through our little stratagem. My reward was an extra special beating for having been so wicked as to lure an innocent like Bunce into my web of sin.

The real-life Bunce and I have been in touch since the publication of Moab. He was very good-natured about it and reminded me of an event I had entirely forgotten.

Very early on in my school life I had told Bunce that my parents were dead.

‘How terrible for you!’ Bunce, always kindly, was deeply moved.

‘Yes. Car crash. I have three aunts that I get handed around during the school holidays. You must swear not to tell anyone, though. It’s a secret.’

Bunce nodded, a look of stout defiance on his downy face. I knew that he would sooner cut out his own tongue than say a word to anyone.

Towards the end of term, I asked Bunce what plans he had for Christmas. He looked uncomfortable as he confessed that he was off with his family to the West Indies.

‘What about you?’ he asked.

‘Derr … in Norfolk with my parents, of course. Where else?’

‘B-b-but … I thought your parents were dead and that you lived with aunts?’

‘Ah. Mm. Yes.’

Damn. Busted.

Bunce looked hurt and confused.

‘You mustn’t mind me,’ I said, staring at him fixedly, ‘You see … I …’

‘Yes?’

‘I say these things.’

We never spoke of it again. Not until Bunce reminded me of it forty-five years later. He remembered the incident with absolute clarity. ‘I say these things,’ were, he maintains, my exact words.


Regularly caned, always in trouble, never stable, never settled in or secure, I left prep school a sugar addict, thief, fantasist and liar.

The pattern continued at my next school, Uppingham in Rutland. More stealing, more sweets. By this time the sheer quantity of sugary food I had gorged upon was beginning to take a real and painful physical toll. Not in the waistline, for I was as skinny as a pencil, but in the mouth. Caries, cavities and cankerous ulcers were constant companions. By my fourteenth birthday I had lost five of my back teeth for ever. The need for sugar was destroying me. The rush of excitement as I stole and the rush from the sugar as I sat and feasted on my kill inevitably ended, such is the way of passion, in the crash of guilt, melancholia, nausea and self-disgust that follow all such addictions … sugar, shopping, alcohol, sex, you name it.

More stealing resulted in a rustication, which was the public-school word for being sent home for a few weeks: ‘suspension’ I suppose one would call it now. Finally the school could put up with me no longer, and I was expelled.† I had gone to London on an officially sanctioned weekend away to attend a meeting of the Sherlock Holmes Society of London, of which I was an enthusiastic member. Instead of being in London for just two nights, as agreed, I stayed away for a week, blissfully locking myself into cinemas watching film after film after film. Enough, as parents and schoolmasters never tired of saying, was enough.


Tobacco’s bitter juices will soon take over the story. Once that loveable leaf had me folded in its fond embrace, sugar never had quite the same hold over me again. But there is a little more yet to tell of my troubled relationship with C12H22O11.

As I grew to late adolescence and early manhood my loyalty to Sugar Puffs was little by little replaced with a passion for Scott’s Porage Oats, made with cold milk, but generously sprinkled, to be sure, with spoonfuls of granulated sugar. At the same time, my childhood adoration of sherbet and fizzy chews gave way to a more adult preference for that altogether more sophisticated confection, chocolate. And of course there was coffee.



The Sugar Puffs addict has moved on to Scott’s Porage Oats.

It is 1982, and I am in a shabby set of rooms in London that belong to Granada Television. Ben Elton, Paul Shearer, Emma Thompson, Hugh Laurie and I are gathered there to rehearse for the first series of what will later become a TV sketch show called Alfresco. The title of this first series is There’s Nothing to Worry About. I wanted it to be called Trouser, Trouser, Trouser but was, perhaps rightly, overruled.



Providence has once again been merciful. Alfresco.

We are in our early twenties and have left university eight months earlier. Everything should be wonderful in our lives, and I suppose it is. Hugh, Emma, Paul and I have won the first Perrier Award at the Edinburgh Festival for our university revue; a tour of Australia has followed. We have just come from filming that revue for the BBC and now we are about to create our very own television series.

Big sticky tins of Nescafé and boxes of PG Tips teabags stand on a trestle table at one end of the room. There is something about rehearsal that encourages the consumption of great quantities of tea and coffee. This morning, as a sketch is being run through that everyone is in except me (it involves music and dancing), I make coffee for them all and realize, as my hand goes towards the teaspoon, that I am the only one who takes sugar.

There I am, teaspoon poised over an open bag of Tate and Lyle. Suppose I were to give it up? I have always been told that tea and coffee are infinitely better without it. I look across at the others and vow there and then that I will go sugar-free for two weeks. If, after a fortnight of unsweetened coffee, I have failed to acquire a taste for it, I shall return to my two and a half teaspoonfuls none the worse off.

I light a cigarette and watch the others. A rather splendid swell of proud elation surges up inside me. Perhaps I can do it.

And I do. Ten days later somebody hands me a coffee to which sugar has been added. I leap and start at the first sip as if I have been given an electric shock. It is the most wonderful shock of my life for it tells me that I have succeeded in giving something up. It is far from the greatest tale of triumph over adversity you ever read, but that memory of myself staring at the bag of sugar and wondering if I really could quit never left me. It was to be the one faint whisper of hope in the bottom of Pandora’s box. I can still smell that rehearsal room and hear its piano. I can still see the packets of biscuits on the trestle table and the Tate and Lyle bag, some of the sugar gathered into translucent crystalline lumps from the repeated insertion of a wet teaspoon.


I saw and smelt and relived that scene once more twenty-seven years later in a room at the Hotel Colbert in Antananarivo, Madagascar. It was very, very hot and very, very humid, and I was wearing nothing but boxer shorts. An approaching thunderstorm growled menacingly, and the hotel’s internet connection, flaky at the best of times, failed. As I stood up from the desk to go to the bathroom a terrible sight caught my eye.

An enormously fat man with gigantic drooping bosoms and a vast overhanging belly was crossing the room. I checked, turned back and stared in horror and disbelief. There he was again, filling the wardrobe mirror, a comically overweight middle-aged man, as grotesquely obese as anyone I had seen since I had filmed in the American midwest the year before. I inspected the bulk of this disgusting mountain of blubber from tip to toe and began to weep.

I had spent the last quarter-century seeing myself on large and small screens and photographed in newspapers and had never been under any illusions concerning my physical appearance. But for some reason on that evening in that room I saw myself as I was. I did not shudder, cover myself up and move on. I did not pretend that everything was fine. I did not say to myself that I was tall enough to carry a little extra weight. I cried at the terrible thing I had become.

There were scales in the bathroom. One hundred and thirty-nine kilograms. What was that in old-fashioned English? I had an app for that on my phone. Twenty-one stone and twelve pounds. Holy imperial hell. Twenty-two stone. Three hundred and six pounds.

I remembered that rehearsal room in 1982. I had managed to give up sugar in tea and coffee. Now it was time to give it up in all its manifestations: puddings, chocolates, toffee, fudge, mints, ice-cream, doughnuts, cakes, buns, tarts, flans, flapjacks, jelly and jam. I would have to exercise too. It could not be a diet, it could only be a complete change in the way I ate and lived.

I won’t claim that not a single grain of sugar has passed my lips since that moment of epiphanic horror in Madagascar, but I have managed to avoid such tempting patisserie, puddings, candied fruits, chocolates, ices, petits fours and friandises as waiters present to one at the sort of restaurants in which me and my spoilt kind hang out. Combined with a regime of daily walks, thrice-weekly gym visits and the general avoidance of starchy and fatty foods, this steadfast forbearance has allowed my weight to drop to something below sixteen stone.

I have not the slightest doubt that I could easily balloon again and find myself hurtling back up past the twenty-first, twenty-second, twenty-third, twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth floors like a cartoon character in an express lift. Constant vigilance is the watchword. It is no part of my business with you to maintain that I now fully know myself, but I think I can profess convincingly that I do at least know myself well enough to be nothing but doubtful and distrustful when it comes to any claims of solutions, cures and arrivals at final destinations.

Take smoking, for instance …





C is for Cigarettes


… for Convict

… for Cundall

… for Corporal Punishment

… for Common Pursuit

… for Cessation

All they that love not tobacco and boys are fools

Christopher Marlowe


Given that I was so disruptive, disobliging and disobedient as a schoolboy it is perhaps surprising that I didn’t smoke my first cigarette until I was fifteen. As if to compensate for being an early bloomer in matters of the mind I had always been a late developer in matters of the body. My first orgasm and my first cigarette came later to me than they did to most of my contemporaries, and, looking back, it is as though I spent decades trying to make up for lost time. I think I have always linked smoking and sex. Maybe this is where I have been going wrong all my life.

In 1979, towards the end of my first year at Cambridge, I wrote a play called Latin! or Tobacco and Boys. Dominic Clarke, the hero, if such a title can used of so warped a character, delivers a speech in the second act in which he describes and conflates his first sexual and smoking experience.


One of those painful steps towards manhood was my first smoke. It was behind the fives courts of my house at school, with a boy called Prestwick-Agutter. I can remember it as if it were five minutes ago. Prestwick-Agutter opened his packet of Carlton Premium and drew out a short, thin … cigarette. As my lips rounded about the tip I began to feel panic. I could hear my boyhood being strangled inside me and a new fire awakening. Prestwick-Agutter lit the end, and I sucked and inhaled. The ears buzzed, the blood caught fire and somewhere in the distance my boyhood moaned. I ignored it and sucked again. But this time my body rejected it, and I coughed and expectorated. My boy’s lungs couldn’t take the filthy whirl of smuts I was so keen to introduce to them and so I coughed and kept on coughing. Despite my inner excitement and my great coughing fit, I managed to maintain a cool, unruffled exterior, with which to impress Prestwick-Agutter, who was amused by my coolness and pluck. British Phlegm and British Spunk flowed freely in me and out of me, and the Public School Spirit was born. After about an hour, it began to rain, so we dashed into the nearest fives court and leant against the buttress. It was an afternoon of rare agony. It was later that evening, when a horde of uncouth Philistines was raiding my study, Prestwick-Agutter amongst them, that my voice broke. Really quite suddenly. I was nearly seventeen, rather embarrassing really.


While that speech was not (I assure you) autobiographical on my part, Dominic’s response to sex and cigarettes does correspond largely to my own. I coughed and vomited rather badly. Not after sex, I should say, but after my first smoke. And after my second and third. Nature was giving me powerful hints that I chose to ignore.

I was at home, fifteen years old, disgraced and expelled† when I started to smoke. My parents had chosen for me the Paston School in North Walsham, Norfolk, a direct-grant grammar whose major claim to fame was having had Horatio Nelson as an unhappy pupil. To get there every morning required a ride on a motor coach that passed, on its way to the school, through the market town of Aylsham. After a few weeks of the Paston I found myself getting off the bus at Aylsham and spending the day in a small café, where I could smoke, drink frothy coffee and play pinball until the coach came back through on its return journey. This chronic truancy resulted, of course, in another expulsion. Next I was sent to NORCAT, the Norfolk College of Arts and Technology in King’s Lynn. Whatever money I could beg, borrow or steal from my mother’s handbag went on cigarettes. As an addiction it was more expensive than Sugar Puffs or sweets and almost as disastrous to teeth, yet wholly more acceptable socially.

The average tuck shop ciggie brands for poor students were Players Number Six, Embassy, Carlton and Sovereign. If I had enjoyed a win at three-card brag I might lash out on Rothmans, Dunhill or Benson and Hedges, but when I was truly in the funds the tobacco equivalent of the Uley village shop beckoned. My obsession with Oscar Wilde, Baron Corvo and the appealingly poisonous world of late nineteenth-century decadence resulted in a pretentious preference for exotic brands. Sobranie Cocktails, Passing Cloud, Sweet Afton, Carroll’s Major, Fribourg & Treyer and Sullivan Powell Private Stock were the most desirable, especially the last two, which could only be bought from one specialist tobacconist’s shop in all of Norfolk or from their very own premises in London’s Haymarket and Burlington Arcade.

It was to London that I went when at last I ran away from King’s Lynn. The threatening approach of exams and the probability that I would fail them had combined with a tiresome adolescent ‘I don’t need no education’ attitude, all of which resulted in a cutting and running. Like Dr Watson in the first Sherlock Holmes story, I found myself drawn to Piccadilly, ‘that great cesspool into which all the loungers and idlers of the Empire are irresistibly drained’. Now I had someone else’s credit cards† to keep me in the very choicest brands of cigarette. Perched on a barstool in the American Bar of the Ritz Hotel, I would sip cocktails, puff Sobranies and think myself urbane. Somewhere along the way I had snaffled and kept my grandfather’s old collars and the leather box shaped like a horseshoe in which they were kept. Not only was I a seventeen-year-old trying to look like a compound of Wilde, Coward, Fitzgerald and Firbank, I was a seventeen-year-old in a Gatsby-style suit and starched wing collar smoking coloured cigarettes through an amber cigarette holder. It is extraordinary that I escaped a violent beating.

What I did not escape was arrest. The police caught up with me in Swindon, and after a night in the cells I found myself banged up in a young offenders institution with the endearingly quaint Cotswold name of Pucklechurch.

Tobacco, as is well known, is the major currency on the inside. Relative peace, control and stability are achieved within prison walls through structured jobs, but no convict could ever be relied upon to work were it not that the wages of his labour are the only means by which he can buy his snout, his burn, his baccy. He who has the most tobacco has the most status, influence, respect and contentment. This was certainly true in my day, it may all have changed since then.

You might think that the really smart gaolbird would therefore be a non-smoker or at least have the sense to become one. There are almost none that smart, of course. There are plenty of clever gaolbirds, but very few clever in quite that way. You can almost define a convict as one who lacks precisely the kind of wisdom and self-control necessary to derive long-term advantage from short-term discomfort. This deficiency is what will have turned them to crime in the first place and what will have caused them to be inept enough at it to get caught and captured in the second. To expect a convict to have the strength to give up smoking is to expect a leopard to change his spots, become vegetarian and learn to knit, all on the same day.

I was a natural criminal because I lacked just that ability to resist temptation or to defer pleasure for one single second. Whatever guard there is on duty in the minds and moral make-ups of the majority had always been absent from his post in my mental barracks. I am thinking of the sentry who mans the barrier between excess and plenty, between right and wrong. ‘That’s enough Sugar Puffs for now, we don’t need another bowl,’ he would say in my friends’ heads or, ‘One chocolate bar would be ample.’ Or ‘Gosh, look, there’s some money. Tempting, but it isn’t ours.’ I never had such a guard on duty.

Actually that isn’t quite true. Where Pinocchio had Jiminy Cricket I had my Hungarian grandfather. He had died when I was ten, and ever since the day of his going I had been uncomfortably aware that he was looking down and grieving over what the Book of Common Prayer would call my manifold sins and wickedness. I had erred and strayed from my ways like a lost sheep, and there was no health in me. Grand-daddy watched me steal, lie and cheat; he caught me looking at illicit pictures in magazines and he saw me play with myself; he witnessed all my greed and lust and shame; but for all his heedful presence he could not prevent me from going to hell in my own way. If I had been psychopathic enough to feel no remorse or religious enough to believe in redemption through a divine outside agency, perhaps I should have been happier; as it was I had neither the consolation that I was free of guilt, nor the conviction that I could ever be forgiven.



Grandpapa.


In gaol, everyone inside rolled their own cigarettes. A week’s wages could buy nearly enough Old Holborn or Golden Virginia tobacco to last the seven days until next payday. The cigarette papers, for no good reason that I could understand, were the usual Rizla+ brand, but presented in a buff-coloured pack with the words ‘H M Prisons Only’ printed at an angle across the flap. I hoarded as many of these as I could and contrived to smuggle them out on my release. For years afterwards I would refill these from the standard red, blue and green Rizla+ packs commercially available on the outside and enjoy the bragging rights of being seen with prison-issue rolling papers. Pathetic. I want so much to go back and slap myself sometimes. Not that I would pay the slightest attention.

As the prison week ended and the less careful inmates began to run out of burn they went through a peculiar begging ritual that I, never one to husband resources either, was quick to learn. You would spot someone smoking and slide ingratiatingly up to them. ‘Twos up, mate,’ you would wheedle and if you were the first to have got the request in you would be rewarded with their fag-end once they had done with it. These soggy second-hand butts, whose few remaining strands of precious tobacco were all bitter and tarred by the smoke that had passed through them, were as a date palm in the desert, and I would smoke them right down until they burnt and blistered my lips. We all know the indignities to which enslaved humans will submit themselves in order to satisfy their addictions, whether for narcotics, alcohol, tobacco, sugar or sex. The desperation, savagery and degradation they publicly display make truffling pigs seem placid and composed by comparison. That image of myself scorching my mouth and fingertips as I hungrily hissed in a last hit of smoke should have been enough to tell me all I needed to know about myself. It wasn’t of course. I had decided at school, when it had been borne in on me how hopeless I was at sport, that I was a useful brain on top of a useless body. I was mind and spirit, while those around me were mud and blood. The truth that I was more a victim of physical need than they were I would angrily have repudiated. Which just goes to show how complete an arse I was.



Tragic hair. Tragic times. Taken some time between school and prison.


After a month or so of remand in Pucklechurch I was at last sentenced by the court to two years’ probation and released back to my parents. This time around I managed to enrol myself at a college and to sit for A levels and the Cambridge entrance paper.†

Prison appeared to have marked the lowest point of my life. The suicide attempts,† tantrums and madness of my mid-teens seemed to be over. Back home in Norfolk I concentrated on academic work, achieved A grades and won a scholarship to read English at Queens’ College, Cambridge.

Now that I had the good news of my acceptance, I faced the problem of what to do with the months leading up to the first term. Unlike today’s intrepid, elephant-hair-braceleted student adventurers and gap-year eco-warriors who hike the Inca trail, work with lepers in Bangladesh and dive and ski and surf and hang-glide and Facebook their way around the world having sex and wearing baggy shorts, I chose the already hideously old-fashioned challenge of teaching in a private school. I always believed that I was born to teach, and the world of the English prep school was one whose codes and manners I thoroughly understood. All the more reason for a stylish person to avoid such a place and seek new worlds and fresh challenges, one might suppose, but the systole and diastole of my disowning and belonging, rejecting and needing, escaping and returning was well established. I resist and scorn the England that bore me with the same degree of intensity with which I embrace and revere it. Perhaps too I felt that I owed it to myself to put right the failures of my own schooling by helping with the schooling of others. There was also the example of two of my literary heroes, Evelyn Waugh and W. H. Auden, who had each trodden this path. Waugh had even got material for his first novel out of the experience. Perhaps I would too.

I had added my name to the roll of would-be schoolmasters, a roll that resided somewhere in a copperplate hand amongst the roll-top desks, deckled ledgers and Eastlight boxfiles in the cosy, womblike offices of the scholastic agency Gabbitas-Thring, in Sackville Street, Piccadilly. Just two days after registering, a thin, piping voice called me up in Norfolk.

‘We have a vacancy at a very nice prepper in North Yorkshire. Cundall Manor. Latin, Greek, French and a little light rugger and soccer refereeing. As well as the usual duties, of course. Does that appeal?’

‘Gosh. That’s great. Do I have to go up for an interview?’

‘Well now, the happy fact is that Mr Valentine, the father of Cundall’s headmaster Jeremy Valentine, lives not far from you in Norfolk. He will see you.’

Mr Valentine was kind and cardiganned and very interested in my views on cricket. He poured me a generous schooner of amontillado and conceded that, while this young Botham chap could certainly swing the ball, his line and length were surely too erratic to trouble any technically correct batsman. Of Latin and Greek there was no discussion. Nor, thankfully, of rugger or soccer. I was commended on my choice of college.

‘Queens’ used to have a pretty decent Cuppers side in my day. Oliver Popplewell kept wicket. First class.’

I forbore to mention that this same Oliver Popplewell, a friend of the family and now a distinguished QC, had just a few months earlier stood up in his wig and gown and spoken on my behalf at a criminal hearing in Swindon.† It didn’t seem like the right moment.

Valentine Senior stood up and shook my hand.

‘I expect they’ll want you as soon as possible,’ he said. ‘You can catch the fast train to York at Peterborough.’

‘So I’ve … you’re …’

‘Heavens yes. Just the sort of chap Jeremy will be delighted to have on the staff.’


I caught the train and arrived at Cundall a teacher and ‘just the sort of chap’.

Was I now so very different a figure from the thieving, deceitful little shit who had been such a torment to his family for the past ten years? Was all the fury, dishonesty and desire gone? All passion spent, all greed sated? I certainly didn’t believe that I was likely to steal again. I had grown up enough to know how to focus and work and take responsibility for myself. All the adult voices that had shouted in my ear (Think, Stephen. Use your common sense. Work. Concentrate. Consider other people. Think. Think, think, think!) seemed finally to have got through. I had an honest, ordered, respectable and unexciting life to look forward to. I had sown my wild oats and it was time to grow sage.

Or so I imagined.



I was still a smoker. In fact, to suit my new role of schoolmaster I had moved from hand-rolled cigarettes to a pipe. My father had smoked pipes throughout my childhood. Sherlock Holmes, veneration of whom had been the direct cause of my expulsion from Uppingham,† was the most celebrated pipe smoker of them all. A pipe was to me a symbol of work, thought, reason, self-control, concentration (‘It is quite a three pipe problem, Watson’), maturity, insight, intellectual strength, manliness and moral integrity. My father and Holmes had all those qualities, and I wanted to reassure myself and those around me that I did too. Another reason for choosing a pipe, I suppose, was that at Cundall Manor, the Yorkshire prep school at which I had been offered a post as an assistant master, I was closer in age to the boys than to the other members of staff and I felt therefore that I required a look that would mark me out as an adult; a briar pipe and a tweed jacket with leather patches at the elbows seemed to answer the case perfectly. The fact that a lanky late-adolescent smoking a pipe looks the worst kind of pompous and pretentious twazzock did not cross my mind, and those around me were too kind to point it out. The boys called me the Towering Inferno, but, perhaps because the headmaster was also a pipe smoker, the habit itself went unchallenged.

I still had no need to shave, and the flop of straight hair that to this day I can do nothing about continued to contradict my desire to project maturity. Looking more pantywaist than professorial and more milquetoast than macho, I puffed benignly about the school as happy as I had ever been in all my young life.

Having said which, the first week had been hell. It had never occurred to me that teaching could be so tiring. My duties, as a valet would say, were extensive: not just teaching and keeping order in the form-room but preparing lessons, correcting and marking written work, giving extra tuition, covering for other masters and being on call for everything and everyone from the morning bell before breakfast to lights-out at night. Since I lived in the school and had no ties of marriage outside it, the headmaster and other senior staff were able to make as much use of me as they wished. I had ostensibly been hired as the replacement for a sweet, gentle old fellow called Noel Kemp-Welch, who had slipped on the ice and fractured his pelvic girdle at the beginning of term. The kernel of my work therefore was to take his Latin, Greek and French lessons, but I very soon found myself standing in for the headmaster and other members of staff giving classes in history, maths, geography and science. On my third day I was told to go and teach biology to the Upper Fifth.

‘What are they covering at the moment?’ I asked. My knowledge of the subject was sketchy.

‘Human reproduction.’

I learnt a great deal that morning both about teaching and, as it happens, about human reproduction too.

‘So,’ I had said to the class. ‘Tell me what you know …’

I made it sound as if I was testing them, and nodded importantly as they replied; in fact, of course, I was temporizing wildly. I listened fascinated, repelled and disbelieving as they outlined the details of pipes and glands and flaps and protuberances of which I had heard but with whose forms, features and functions I was entirely unfamiliar. The vas deferens, the Fallopian tubes, the epididymis, the clitoris and the frenulum … it was engrossingly gross. I left the science room most impressed by the depth and range of the Upper Fifth’s knowledge.

When there were no lessons the Cundall Manor timetable was devoted to manly pursuits. Without the slightest familiarity with the rules of either game I found myself running around rugby and soccer fields with a whistle between my teeth. I discovered that if I blew it, dug my heel randomly into the mud, pointed goalward and announced a scrum-down or indirect free kick every five or ten minutes or so I seemed to be able to get by.

‘But, sir! What was the offence?’

‘Don’t think I didn’t see, Heydon-Jones.’

‘Surely it should be a direct free kick, sir?’

‘If it was a direct free kick I would have awarded a direct free kick, wouldn’t I?’

If it was a great joke that I, a sports-hating, disruptive, anti-social, rebellious triple-expulsee probationary criminal should now be dishing out punishments, blowing referee’s whistles and calling for silence at morning prayers, then it was not a joke that I ever much stopped to examine or smile over. So far as I was concerned my reinvention was complete, and the sly, furtive Stephen who had slunk about on the outside of the healthy decent world was dead and wholly unconnected to the amiable young fogey who made puns in Latin and threatened to flog the Fourth Form to within an inch of their miserable lives if they couldn’t keep quiet for a second, damn it all to Hades and back – and face the front, Halliday, or I shall whip you with scorpions, by the bowels of Christ I shall.

Such threats were comic hyperbole, of course, but corporal punishment did still exist in those days and at that school. Did I ever raise my hand in violence to a child in the name of discipline and good order? Yes, I confess that I did. I had been beaten myself at school and had never questioned the role of the cane, ruler or slipper in school life. Before you wring your hands or make to wring my neck, let me explain.

It came about like this …


I am on duty one evening about a month into my first term. This means that I have to settle the boys down for the night, put out the lights and remain on call for any emergencies and unexpected crises. The dormitories at Cundall are named after seabirds: Avocet, Guillemot, Oystercatcher, that sort of thing. At my own prep school they had been named after trees – Beech, Elm, Oak and Sycamore. I suppose in the twenty-first century’s more sophisticated, child-friendly establishments school sleeping quarters are now called Ferrari, Aston Martin, Porsche and Lamborghini or Chardonnay, Merlot, Pinot Noir and Shiraz, or even Beyoncé, Britney, Jay-Z and Gaga, but in my era, the era of Peter Scott, Gerald Durrell and the Tufty Club, nature and woodland creatures were considered the most meet and seemly sources for boyhood inspiration.

I switch out the lights in Tern and Puffin and walk along the top landing towards Cormorant, from which dormitory issues an inordinate amount of noise.

‘All right, settle down in here! Why is it always Cormorant?’

‘Sir, sir, my pillow’s broken.’

‘Sir, there’s a terrible draught in here.’

‘Sir, I’m sure I saw a ghost.’

‘We’re scared, sir.’

‘Look. Enough. I’m turning the lights out. Not a squeak. Not. A. Squeak. And yes, Philips, that does include you.’

Downstairs I go and into the staffroom. A fire is blazing, and I sit down with a pile of exercise books for marking. Before I begin the business of correcting I fish the pipe from the pocket of my tweed jacket. I bring out with it a Smoker’s Friend – combination pen-knife, reamer, tamper and bradawl. I fiddle and scrape and poke for a while, banging out the dottle from my previous pipeful into an ashtray and puffing down the stem like a horn player warming up his trumpet. Next I prise open a tin of Player’s Whisky Flake and peel back a single layer of firm, slightly moist tobacco. The sweet woody smell laced with something that may or may not be the whisky that the brand name promises rises up to greet me like a holy balm. I lay the wedge in my left hand and with the tips of the fingers of my right I begin to massage it into the palm with a firm circular motion. Most pipe smokers prefer a pouch of ready-rubbed, but for me the ritual of loosening and shredding a pressed wafer of tobacco is almost as important as the inhalation of smoke itself.

There is an excellent line in Ian Fleming’s last Bond novel, The Man with the Golden Gun: ‘The best drink in the day,’ he observes, ‘is just before the first one.’ So it is with my habit. The best smoke for me is the one I have in my head while I am priming the pipe and preparing to puff.

Just as I am about to pack the bowl and fire up I hear above me the thudding of bare feet on floorboards.

Cormorant.

With an exasperated sigh, I lay down the pipe and next to it the tangle of freshly rubbed tobacco. As I ascend the stairs I hear stifled giggles and slaps, snaps and whispers. I stride in and switch on the lights. A ritualized fight is in progress, now frozen in the sudden illumination. School ties are being cracked and flicked like whips. I remember these fights from my own dormitory days.

‘Silence! Back into bed all of you. Right this minute!’

A scramble as they leap into their beds and instantly pretend to be asleep.

I switch out the lights. ‘One more sound from this dormitory and whoever is responsible will be for the whack. Do you understand? For the whack. I mean it.’

Back in the study I note with disappointment that the two or three minutes that the ball of tobacco has spent on my desk has been enough to dry its loosened shreds a little. I fill the bowl and press the tobacco down with my thumb. Still moist enough to pack well. Firm, with a hint of springiness.

Now comes the moment my brain and lungs have been aching for.

Only Swan Vestas will do at this point, no other incendiary device is quite up to the mark: not specialized pipe-smoker’s lighters, however cunning and elaborate, not Bryant and May matches, not a Bic, Clipper, Zippo, Ronson, Calibri, Dupont or Dunhill, excellent in their own ways as they all may be. Swan Vestas are real matches, which is to say you can scrape their magenta heads against any rough surface, not just the shiny brown strips to which the safety match is restricted. You can use a brick in the wall or, like a cowboy, the heel of your boot. The sandpaper provided on the yellow Swan Vesta box is golden, and nothing else scratches like it. I pull the match towards me. I know that one is supposed to strike away in case fragments of burning match-head fly into the face, but I prefer the scooping inwards motion, the way one finishes by bringing the flaring match up before one’s eyes.

The sulphurous incense tingles in my nostrils as I tip the lit match at an angle over the bowl and then slowly flatten it out. Each inhalation sucks the flame downwards over the prepared tobacco which fizzes and bubbles in welcome, its moist freshness imparting a thick sweetness to the smoke. Finally, when the whole surface area is lit and just before my fingers burn, three flicks of the wrist extinguish the match. It tinkles as it hits the glass of the ashtray. Matches charred almost to the end have always been a revealing clue for Columbos and Sherlocks. ‘A pipe smoker did this deed, Watson, you mark my words …’

I am puffing now. One, two, three, four, five draws on the pipe, smacking the lips at the side of the mouth. Each hard suck stokes up the boiler so that, on the sixth or seventh pull, I can breathe in a whole lungful. The hot smoke instantly penetrates the bronchioles and alveoli of the lungs, sending its gift of nicotine rushing through the blood to the brain. So powerful a hit can cause giddiness and sweating in even the most hardened pipe smoker. But the bang deep inside, the grateful surge of encephalins and endorphins, the thudding kick to the system followed by the sweet electric buzz and hum as the body’s benign pharmacopoeia is released in a single torrent – what are coughs, nausea, burns to the tongue and mouth, bitter tar in the spittle and the slow degradation of pulmonary capacity compared to that spinning, pulsing burst of love, that shuddering explosion of joy?

That first dose is really what the experience is all about. From then on the trick is to keep the pipe alight with gentle, infrequent tuts and puffs on the stem; smaller cigarette-sized inhalations of smoke will follow until the remaining plug, which has acted as a filter for the tobacco above it, is so fouled and contaminated with tar and toxins that the pipe may be declared dead and ready for the cleaning, scraping and reaming routine to be undertaken all over again.

I am at the steady puffing stage now, as content as any human on the planet – a self-fulfilling contentment that only a pipe can provide: pipe smokers look content, they know themselves to be a symbol of old-fashioned contentment and therefore they are content – when a loud skittering above my head jerks me up from the exercise book I am marking.

Damn it to hell.

It was just one little noise, like a mouse in the wainscotting. I can ignore it.

But no, another sound, that unmistakable thud made by bare feet on floorboards.

A wrathful tide engulfs me. I am now precisely as irate as I was content. Had I been less placidly, pipe-smokingly serene, I would not now be streaking up the stairs with such fury.

‘Philips! Of course. Who else? Right. Well. What did I say? I said the next culprit was going to be for the whack and I meant it. Dressing-gown and slippers, outside the staffroom. Now!’

As I make my way downstairs ahead of him I realize the magnitude of what is about to happen. I threatened the whack, which at Cundall meant not the cane, or a ruler, or a slipper, but a plimsoll. I go into the staffroom. Pipe smoke hangs in rooms in a quite different manner to cigarette smoke. Heavy layers of it are wafted into corrugated waves by the draught of my entrance. I close the door. In a cupboard under the master’s pigeonholes I find the official small black gym shoe which I pick up and flex, bending it back on itself and letting it spring back.

What have I done? If I fail to go through with the threatened beating then such authority as I have will be undermined and I will never be able to control the boys again. But how hard does one beat? Suppose I make him cry? Oh good lord.

I pace up and down, slapping the sole of the gym shoe on to my palm hard, then harder and harder until it stings fiercely.

A timid knock at the door.

I clear my throat. ‘Enter.’

Philips shuffles in. His face is set and serious. He is frightened. It is known that I have never administered the whack before, and I must suppose he cannot be certain that I will not be brutal. He seems to know the form better than I do, for he removes his dressing-gown and hangs it on a hook at the back of the door in a manner that suggests he has done this many times before.

‘I told you that whoever I caught mobbing about next was for the whack, didn’t I, Philips?’

‘Yes, sir.’

Why doesn’t he beg for mercy? Then at least I might be in a position to relent. Instead he stands there, fearful but maddeningly resolute, leaving me very few options.

‘Right. Well. Let’s get it over with then.’

I have absolutely no idea how things should proceed at this point, but once again Philips leads the way. He approaches the leather armchair in front of the fire and bends over its arm, presenting his posterior in the approved fashion.

Oh God. Oh hell.

I swing my arm upwards and bring the gym shoe down.

It connects.

There is a silence.

‘There. Right. Well.’

Philips twists his head round and shoots a look up at me. It is a look of complete shock. He is astounded.

‘Is that … is that it, sir?’

‘And let that be a lesson! When I say no messing around, I mean no messing around. Go on then, back to bed with you.’

‘Sir.’

Barely concealing his smirk, Philips straightens, collects his dressing-gown and departs.

The force with which the rubber sole of the gym shoe connected with his bottom would not have bruised a mosquito. If, instead of striking down, I had dropped the shoe on to him it would have hurt more. It might as well have been a tissue as a plimsoll. It had been not a whack but a feeble tap.

I drop into the armchair, shaking all over. Never again. Never again would I threaten corporal punishment.

And never again did I.

*

The tall, mostly humorous pipe-smoking oddity who taught all manner of subjects, refereed junior matches and made himself useful to staff and boys as much as he could enjoyed himself at Cundall. And Cundall seemed to like him, for when he said goodbye at the end of the summer term the headmaster asked if he might be able to come back for the next term.

‘But that’s when I start at Cambridge.’

‘Michaelmas term at Cambridge doesn’t begin till October. Our term starts a month earlier.’

And so for the next two years I came back to Cundall and taught either side of the short Cambridge terms. In the summer I drove the tractor that pulled the gang-mower around the cricket square and I umpired cricket matches. In the winter months I took the boys for walks and on rainy Sundays I compiled quizzes and competitions to keep them occupied.

There was no question in my mind that teaching would be my career. It was my true calling and one that sounded in my head as loud as any school bell. Whether I would teach in a place like Cundall, at university level or somewhere in between only my time at Cambridge would decide. If I had the intellectual heft to make it as an academic then perhaps I would make scholarship my life. I imagined that Shakespearean studies would be my métier and tweed and briar my constant accoutrements.

It was a pleasant enough prospect. I was over that terrible sugar addiction and the madness and disruption it had caused. It had been replaced by a woody, tweedy, old-fashioned masculine dependency which, so long as the supply was there, did not modify mood or behaviour and which also served to remind me that I was now a mature, sober, rational adult. I made no allowance for love, sex or the body of course. I was fire and air – in other words, smoke: my other elements, like Cleopatra, I gave to baser life …


Ten years later, in 1988, I met one of Britain’s greatest smokers. He was at the time a premier drinker too.

‘I come,’ he told Rik Mayall, John Gordon Sinclair, John Sessions, Sarah Berger, Paul Mooney and me as we gathered for the first rehearsal of his play The Common Pursuit, ‘from the booze and fags generation.’ He slumped his shoulders down ruefully to emphasize that this was an ineluctable fact in whose remorseless face he was powerless.

Simon Gray was then, I realize with a slight shudder, exactly the age I am as I write this now. He had, like his favourite actor Alan Bates, a full flop of black hair, but his physique was less solid. Years of drinking had bulged his tummy into a gentle pot while simultaneously wasting his lower half, so that he was spindle-shanked and all but arseless. I almost never saw him without a cigarette in one hand and a drinking receptacle in the other. In the mornings he gulped down champagne, which in his eyes barely counted as alcohol. From lunchtime onwards he sipped at endless coffee mugs or plastic cups of Glenfiddich whisky. It was the first time I had been at close quarters with an authentic alcoholic. Some of my generation drank more than was good for them and would go on to develop into the real thing, but for the moment youth was on their side.

Unusually for the professional theatre, rehearsals for The Common Pursuit would begin after lunch. We all decided early on that this was because Simon, who was directing the production, was not able to function before that time. In fact, as I found out, it was because he spent the mornings at his desk. No matter how much he drank, he always seemed able to put in plenty of daily writing hours as a playwright and diarist. Just occasionally I caught sight of him early in the morning, before his first champagne. It was a ghastly sight. His face sagged, his eyes were dull, rheumy and bleared, his voice creaked huskily, and his whole being looked defeated and incapable of thought, action or purpose. One sip of an alcoholic drink, however, and he revived like a desert flower in the rain. He seemed to grow inches taller in front of you, a light and sparkle appeared in his eyes, his complexion smoothed and brightened, and his voice strengthened and cleared. Simon Gray, I decided when I first witnessed this frog into prince transformation, did not have a drinking problem. He had a drinking solution.

Rik Mayall’s nickname for him was Mr Drinky. We adored him and he appeared to adore us. ‘I know nothing of your generation,’ he would say. ‘I don’t watch television so I haven’t seen “The Young Ones” or “Blackadder” or whatever the things you do are called. They told me to audition you, and so I did. You all seem absurdly young and confident, and I am assured that you will bring an audience into the theatre.’

That we seemed young to him I can imagine, but that we gave the impression of confidence seemed extraordinary in any of us except of course Rik Mayall. Rik was a force of nature who appeared charismatically invincible and fearlessly uninhibited from the moment he burst on to the comedy scene with his friend Ade Edmondson in the early eighties. I suppose that I too, as ever, emanated waves of looming self-confidence that I most certainly did not feel.

The title of Simon’s play came from a phrase coined and used as the title of a collection of essays by the critic and academic F. R. Leavis, who founded a whole school of English-literature studies whose high seriousness, attention to detail and earnest moral purpose were legendary. Simon Gray had been taught by Leavis himself at Cambridge and remained hugely influenced by him. For myself, I’d always thought Leavis a sanctimonious prick of only parochial significance (my own brand of undergraduate sanctimoniousness at work there, I now see) and certainly by the time I arrived at Cambridge his influence had waned, he and his kind having been almost entirely eclipsed by the Parisian post-structuralists and their caravanserai of prolix and impenetrable evangels and dogmatically zealous acolytes. Stories of Frank Leavis and his harridan of a wife, Queenie, snubbing, ostracizing, casting out and calumniating anyone who offended them went the rounds, and those English academics at the university who had been in their orbit were callously dismissed by the elite as dead Leavisites.

Leavis’s intense, suspicious propensity to explode in wrath and to anathematize anyone who dared disagree with him I saw again in Harold Pinter, whose close but combustible friendship with Simon Gray and Simon’s wife, Beryl, was an eternal source of delight to me and John Sessions in particular, as ardent connoisseurs of literary eccentricity. I remember once John and I were sitting in the back brasserie of the Groucho Club. Harold, his wife, Lady Antonia, Beryl and Simon had a corner table. Suddenly Harold’s booming voice burst out. ‘If you are capable of saying such a thing as that, Simon Gray, it is perfectly clear that there is no further basis for our friendship. We are leaving.’

We peeped round to see Harold rise with massive black-polo-necked dignity, stub out a cigarette, toss down the remnants of a whisky and sweep past us, growling all the while. That massive dignity was a little punctured by his realization that the faithful Pakenham hound was not at his heels. He turned and barked across the room, ‘Antonia!’

Lady Magnesia Fridge-Freezer, as Richard Ingrams liked to call her, jerked herself awake (her defence against the madness of Harold’s tantrums was always simply to fall asleep. She could do this in the middle of a meal or sentence, a kind of traumatic symplegia, a condition known only to cats in P. G. Wodehouse, but which I think refers to what we would now call narcolepsy) and softly gathered up her coat. By this time the whole back brasserie was watching the scene unfold and greatly enjoying the embarrassed lacunae, charged glances and menacing exchanges that one associates with the authentically Pinteresque. Antonia smiled seraphically at the Grays and went to join her husband. As she passed our table she stopped and gathered the loose wool at the shoulder of my pullover.

‘Oh, what a lovely jumper,’ she sighed, fingering it for a second.

‘Antonia!’

And she drifted away. I can almost bring myself to believe that the room burst into applause, but I think that would be an instance of the wish being father of the thought.

I raise the issue of Leavis because the moral seriousness he inculcated into the study of letters left its mark on Simon Gray in strange ways. I remember an evening in the bar of the Watford Palace Theatre. We had performed the play for about a week prior to coming into the West End. That night’s performance was a great success, and afterwards Simon dished out the few director’s notes he had scribbled on tickets and taxi receipts while standing at the back of the theatre sipping Glenfiddich. The mood amongst us was good. He sighed something about how young we all were.

‘Actually,’ said John Gordon Sinclair, ‘you remember when I auditioned and you asked me how old I was?’

‘Yes,’ said Simon. ‘What of it?’

‘Well, I said I was twenty-eight, but actually I’m only twenty-five.’

‘What? What? Why?’

‘Well, I knew that you’d cast Stephen and Rik and Johnnie; they were like twenty-nine and thirty and thirty-two or whatever, and I didn’t want you to think I was too young …’

‘You lied?’ Simon stared at him aghast.

‘Yes, well …’ Gordie had clearly imagined that Simon would be amused. It was all over now: he was safely cast in the play, we could all share in the charm of his anxiety to be cast and the little white lie he told to make it more likely. If anything the story was a compliment to the play and his desire to be a part of it. The smile vanished from Gordie’s face as he realized that Simon was far from amused.

‘You lied.’ A characteristic slump and a grimace of pain and despair swept over Simon. ‘You lied?’

Poor Gordie was bright red now and wishing he was dead.

‘Well, I thought …’

‘But to lie …’

Fond of Simon as I was, I thought this was a strange reaction. To disapprove of lying is one thing, but to disapprove of so benign and amiable a lie and so relentlessly to bear down on its perpetrator struck me as being bullying, priggish, mean and grotesquely out of proportion. We all tried in our own way to defuse the moment, but Gordie felt rotten for the rest of the week, convinced that Simon was going to sack him or at the very least hate him for ever, and I was left wondering whether the malignant influence behind it all was whisky or Leavis.

The play we were there to put on chronicled the life of a group of friends who collaborate as students on the founding of a literary magazine called The Common Pursuit. Over the course of the play’s action, hard real life with its loves, infidelities, compromises and betrayals scuffs away the gloss and sheen of the group’s noble ambitions and high Leavisite ideals. John Sessions took the leading part of Stuart, the magazine’s editor, opposite Sarah Berger, who played his girlfriend, Marigold. Paul Mooney was Martin, the best friend endowed with enough private means to keep the magazine going, and John Gordon Sinclair played Peter, a likeable serial philanderer endlessly snared in a tangle of lies and evasions as he tries to run his chaotic seraglio of mistresses. My role was that of a broodingly intelligent, sexually constrained, waspish and socially awkward philosophy don called Humphrey Taylor, who ends up being murdered by a piece of rough trade, à la James Pope-Hennessy and (perhaps) Richard Lancelyn Green. Rik took the part of Nick Finchling, a brilliant, slapdash and entertaining historian who trades his academic promise for an easy career in the media. Nick is a heavy smoker and towards the end of the play he develops emphysema. At one point my character Humphrey upbraids him as he watches him light up and dissolve, for the umpteenth time, into a terrible coughing fit.

‘You should give up.’

‘Why?’

‘For one thing, you’ll live longer.’

‘Oh, you don’t live longer. It just seems longer.’

That was Mr Drinky’s view of his addictions, and now it was mine too. The previous year I had told everyone that I was going to give up smoking on 24 August, my thirtieth birthday. I managed ten nicotine-free days at my house in Norfolk before a group of heavy-smoking friends arrived to stay, their presence soon bending and then snapping my puny will. I would not try again for almost twenty years. Instead I adopted Simon Gray’s guilt-free acceptance of the addiction. No, it was more than guilt-free acceptance: cigarettes were proud banners to be flown. Objections to smoking in Simon’s eyes were contemptible and bourgeois. He was always getting in terrible rows for lighting up in minicabs and those parts of theatres and public spaces which, even back then, were given over to non-smokers. The diaries he wrote and published throughout the eighties, nineties and into the noughties reveal a baleful champion of tobacco barging belligerently through an increasingly intolerant and hostile world. The titles of his final journals make this explicit – The Smoking Diaries Vol. 1, The Smoking Diaries 2: The Year of the Jouncer and The Last Cigarette: Smoking Diaries 3.

Of course the body can take chronic assault from alcohol and tobacco for just so long. The time came for him to give up first one and then the other.





I remember that Paul Smith shirt. My birthday.

*

I am in a quiet residential Notting Hill street in 2006, filming for a documentary on manic depression. The director, Ross Wilson, positions the camera at one end of a long, straight pavement. I walk to the other end, turn round and wait for his cue. All I have to do is walk towards the camera. No acting or speech required. It is one of dozens and dozens of such shots that are filmed all the time in documentaries. Something to fill the screen for a voiced piece of commentary to be laid on later: ‘And so I decided that a visit to the Royal College of Psychiatry might prove useful …’ – that sort of thing.

Ross waves for action, and I start the walk. From out of one of the houses shuffles an old man in a dressing-gown, blocking the shot. I stop and return to my mark. This is always happening when we film in the street, and we are very used to it. Well, not old men in dressing-gowns particularly so much as members of the public, or civilians, as some people in the film and TV business call them, or, wince-inducingly these days, ‘muggles’. TV documentary is not major movie-making, where you have policemen and assistant directors to help marshal the citizenry. In such situations we wait patiently and grin inanely. The man in the dressing-gown slowly and painfully approaches, and I see that it is Simon Gray. His hair is almost white, and his face is sunken in. He looks dreadfully ill and much older than his seventy years.

‘Hello, Simon.’

‘Oh. Hello.’

We have only spoken to each other once since the terrible trauma of 1995 in which I had walked out of his play Cell Mates and fled to Europe. As it happens, the documentary I am filming this very day seeks to find out, amongst other things, what had propelled me to that flight.

‘So. What are you doing?’ Simon asks.

‘Oh. Filming.’ I indicate the camera behind him. I think it wise not to mention that the events of 1995 are central to the film.

He slowly turns, looks at it and then comes round again to me. ‘Ah. Well. There we are, aren’t we? A comedy of some kind I suppose. Well then.’ Never has comedy been made to sound so low, vulgar and pitiful. Simon had never forgiven me for leaving Cell Mates. Initial worry and concern for my well-being at the moment of my leaving had rapidly been replaced by resentment, fury and contempt. All of which was very understandable. The show should have gone on.

I see him just once more. It is July 2008, and I am in a box at Lord’s cricket ground, watching Pietersen and Bell put on nearly 300 runs for the fourth wicket against South Africa. The next-door box is filled with distinguished playwrights: Tom Stoppard, Ronald Harwood, David Hare, Harold Pinter and, sitting quietly in a corner, Simon Gray. Playwrights and cricket have always gone together. Samuel Beckett remains, I believe I am right in saying, the only Nobel Laureate to have had an entry in the cricketer’s almanac, Wisden.

At tea, the nubiferously chain-smoking pair of Tom Stoppard and Ronnie Harwood visit our rather showbizzy box. David Frost is the host and he wonders aloud if there might be a collective noun for a group of playwrights. Stoppard suggests the word ‘snarl’. The particular snarl of playwrights assembled next door has collected a pair of Oscars, a dozen BAFTAs and Olivier Awards, a CH, three CBEs, two knighthoods and a Nobel Prize for Literature. I am happy talking to Stoppard and Harwood, both of whom are as engaging, charming and friendly as Pinter and Gray are obstreperous, cantankerous and unstable. Pinter’s capacity for explosive hostility and liverish offence at the tiniest imagined slight is legendary and, while he has never displayed any animosity towards me, I have always been very wary of speaking to him for more than a few minutes at a time, just in case.

At the close of play I make my way out of the box and walk straight into Simon, whom I have not seen since that afternoon in Notting Hill.

‘Hello, Simon!’ I say. ‘Gosh, you look well.’

Which, compared to two years ago, he does.

‘Do I?’ he says. ‘Well, that’s terminal cancer for you. As a matter of fact I’m dying. That was my last cricket match. Well. There we are. Goodbye.’

He died three weeks later. Whether the prostate cancer that killed him was in any way related to his smoking I have no idea. I suspect that his alcoholism and sixty-five a day were not the cause of his death. At any rate Simon Gray did die and was justly mourned as one of the most individual, intelligent and comically desperate voices of his time. I was not invited to the funeral.


Rewind to 2006. I had decided, I am not quite sure why, that it was time for me to stop smoking. Actually, I think I do know why. I had managed finally to give up the big thing, the thing we will turn to at some other time, and it annoyed me that I found it so hard to do the same with cigarettes. If I could abandon the systematic and heavy use of a Class A forbidden substance, surely I could fight off nicotine addiction with the merest snap of the fingers?

On the shelf by my desk in my London house there stood a strange object. Designed and built by the Dunhill company, it seemed to be an old-fashioned BBC radio microphone. Disassemble and reassemble it in the manner of Scaramanga and his Golden Gun, however, and it became a pipe. This fine trophy had been presented to me a few years previously when I was named Pipe Smoker of the Year. On account of this I now felt a slight twinge of guilt at the thought of quitting. I picked the award up and, like a child with a Transformer toy, twisted, snapped, prised and pushed it into its alternative shape.

It so fell out that my installation in 2003 was to be the last of these funny little Pipe Smoker of the Year ceremonies. The award was ruled by the health authorities to be a form of tobacco advertising by the back door and from that year on was mercilessly proscribed. In its heyday it had celebrated the great icons of the age, most of them a touch suburban and cardiganny perhaps, but, from Harold Wilson to Eric Morecambe, by way of Tony Benn and Fred Trueman, they had represented something rather splendid that has since gone out of British life. Neither smart, nor sophisticated, nor stylish, they were the kind of people you picture devoting their Sundays either to grappling with the garden hose and waxing the Wolseley or to brisk fell-walking, a canvas haversack on their backs and long woolly socks up to their knees.

Dunhill and the event’s organizers went to great trouble to make me my special pipe, mix me my own blend of tobacco and embrace me as one of their own. Now there I was just three years later, planning to leave the fold. It seemed like a betrayal. As a matter of fact, I rarely smoked a pipe in public anyway. For the most part I was a Marlboro man. Not full-on Marlboro Reds, nor anaemic Marlboro Lights, but Mummy Bear Marlboro Mediums – for the compromiser in life. Middle aged, middle brow, middle class, middle rank, middle tar – that’s me. I reserved the old briar pipes for winter months and lonely hours at the writing desk. Although there had been just one recent occasion when I did go out into the world with a pipe …

I was being profiled in the Independent newspaper in the summer of 2003, I cannot remember the purpose; perhaps it was to coincide with the first series of the television programme QI. For no good reason I turned up at the appointed place with a pipe in my pocket. At some stage I must have run out of cigarettes and started in on it. A week later, to accompany the interview, there appeared a picture of me on the cover of the newspaper with the pipe jutting out of my face at an angle, a thick cloud of smoke artfully half concealing my smug features. Sadly my features know no other way of arranging themselves except smugly. Why had I taken the pipe along and why had I smoked it in the presence of a photographer? Looking back, I now wonder if at some entirely subconscious level I had recognized that a pipe would suit the rather professorial side to my character that QI emphasized and maybe that is why I had pocketed it when setting out to meet the journalist. What is interesting, or at least revealing, about the nature of twenty-first-century celebrity, is that it was only a few days after the publication of that interview that a letter arrived from the British Pipesmokers’ Council advising me that I had been elected that year’s Pipe Smoker of the Year. This charming absurdity came so hard on the heels of the article that it was bound to give me the feeling that, if it had chanced to be a bonobo who had been featured on the front page of the Independent smoking a pipe that week, then the accolade would surely have gone to it … desperate is, I suppose, the word to describe the worshipful company of pipe smokers and tobacco blenders. And given the forthcoming demise of the award, perhaps their desperation had good cause.

Now there I sat, three years later, fiddling with my prize pipe and contemplating a betrayal of the smoking cause. ‘Betrayal’ and ‘cause’ are perhaps hysterical and self-important words to use, but smoking to me was a cause; it had always symbolized in my mind something enormous. I have mentioned Sherlock Holmes, but the fact is that almost all my heroes were not just figures who happened to smoke, but more than that, active, proud and positive smokers. They didn’t just smoke in the world, they smoked at the world. Oscar Wilde was one of the pioneers of the cigarette. When he met Victor Hugo, the cher maître’s major obsession was as much with Wilde’s abundant supply of fresh, high-quality cigarettes as with his equally abundant supply of fresh, high-quality epigrams. Wilde’s first episode of real notoriety came when he took to the stage to make his bow after the triumphant first night of Lady Windermere’s Fan with a cigarette between his fingers – a casual detail that enraged many present and was considered worthy enough to mention in just about every press report and in the letters and diaries of those who had been present.

‘A cigarette is the perfect type of a perfect pleasure,’ says Lord Henry Wotton in The Picture of Dorian Gray. ‘It is exquisite, and it leaves one unsatisfied.’ It took me a long time, as with so many of Wilde’s remarks, to understand that this was actually much more profound an insight than it at first glance appeared. The point is that a pleasure which leaves you satisfied stops being a pleasure the moment it has been enjoyed. You are now sated, there is nothing more to be got from it. Sex and food are pleasures of this kind. What follows? A touch of afterglow if you are that sort of person, but mostly guilt, flatulence and self-disgust. You don’t want any more of that kind of pleasure for some time to come. As for behaviour modifiers like alcohol and narcotics, one may want more and more, but they alter mood and manner, and the crash and the hangover that come after can be deeply unpleasant and lowering to the spirits. But a cigarette … a cigarette delivers the keen joy, the hug of gratification, and then – nothing more than the desire to experience it all over again. And so on. No moment of feeling engorged, full, unworthy and sick, nor hangover or mood crash. A cigarette is perfect because, like a highly evolved virus, it attaches itself to the brain of the user such that its only purpose is to induce them to have another. There is a reward for that in the form of pleasure, but the reward is too short-lived to be called satisfaction.

I had then Holmes and Wilde on my side. I had Wodehouse and Churchill, Bogart and Bette Davis, Noël Coward and Tom Stoppard, Simon Gray and Harold Pinter. And ranged against us? Bourgeois nose-wrinklers, sour health-mongers, Hitler, Goebbels and Bernard Shaw, cranks, puritans and interfering prigs. Smoking was a banner of bohemianism, a sign of the rejection of middle-class prudery and respectability, and I was a whale on that, despite being in my heart of hearts as middle class, unadventurous and respectable as anyone I knew. One has, after all, no one to convince in these matters but oneself. If I was to ally myself with outsiders, artists, radicals and revolutionaries then it was natural that I would smoke and smoke proudly. I know. Pathetic, isn’t it?

I have said nothing of death here. Nothing of the ravages to the complexion, throat, heart and lungs that cigarettes wreak. What Oscar did not know is that the most superb quality of all possessed by these beguiling little cylinders of joy is the gradualness of their toxicity, the imperceptibly nuanced encroachments of their poison. Their very benignity (after the clammy dizziness, reeling and nausea induced in virgin smokers to which I have already alluded), the excruciating slowness and delicacy with which they set about their business of killing, the irresistibly tempting credit period they offer that promises so seemingly unbridgeable a distance between present pleasure and future payment … such slow, unremitting and diabolical subtlety delivers what a true sadist and connoisseur of pain would surely consider the highest pitch of the exquisite.

I had been a most vocal apologist for smoking and a noisily belligerent enemy of the anti-smoking lobby. But as I sat toying with the Dunhill microphone pipe that day I realized that I had changed. Inasmuch as experiences are rarely to be regretted there was something pleasing to my mind now in considering life as a non-smoker. I had enjoyed well over thirty years of tobacco use and now I was to see what life would be like without it. I was almost looking forward to testing myself. So long as I pledged never ever to be intolerant of those fellow smokers I left behind.

Fight fire with fire, fight drugs with drugs. I had heard about a pill called Zyban, a proprietary name for amfebutamone, better known in America as Welbutrin, one of the most prescribed anti-depressants in the world. I had read somewhere that it also works as a ‘smoking cessation aid’ in almost 30 per cent of cases. I called up my doctor’s secretary and made an appointment. He wrote out a prescription for a three-week course. In the same way that these pills, in order to counter depression, acted on the brain’s own store of mood elevators – noradrenaline and dopamine and so on – so they acted, it was claimed, to calm, inhibit and allay the anxieties and horrors of nicotine withdrawal. The unusual and appealing thing was that you were told to take the pill and carry on smoking. For some reason the craving would leave you, if you were one of the 27 per cent on whom the treatment worked.

And you know what? It turned out that I was.

It was a miracle. I just found myself stopping and not minding.


I fly to America, for the first time in my life happy to spend twelve and a half hours on an aeroplane without being reduced to the indignity of nicotine-replacement patches, gums and inhalers – sometimes, in the bad old days, all three at once.

On the fourth Thursday of November, which is Thanksgiving Day in the United States, I have a meeting with the film-maker Peter Jackson, for whom I am to write a screenplay based on the great raid on the German dams of the Ruhr in 1943. A masterpiece of British cinema had already been made on the Dambusters story, of course, but we hoped to be able to tell it again, incorporating details that in 1954 were too sensitive or secret to reveal.

I arrive at the Beverly Hills Hotel bungalow that Peter has taken for the duration of his stay, and we talk over the details. Fran, Peter’s wife, is present as well as other members of their production company, Wingnut. Thanksgiving Day is a perfect time to have an uninterrupted meeting if, like us, you are not American.

When the conference is over an assistant loads into the boot of my rental car an enormous box of research materials that Wingnut has assembled for me. Every imaginable archival resource on the subject of the Dambusters raid, in text, video, sound or photographic form has been gathered together for my convenience. There is even a facsimile of R. C. Sherriff’s screenplay of the 1954 Michael Anderson film. I drive along Sunset Boulevard, into West Hollywood and towards the Chateau Marmont, the hotel where I have taken an apartment-like set of rooms for the month or so I have to deliver the screenplay.

I spend a happy evening going through the documents and planning the next day’s writing. How pleasant it all is. How lucky I am. What can go wrong?

There is something of a commotion next door, and I look out into the corridor to see the actress Lindsay Lohan being stretchered away. It seems that her partying has caught up with her. The Chateau Marmont will always be best known, I fear, for being the scene of John Belushi’s final fatal speedball. It is still a favourite haunt of Hollywood’s more raffish party element, and Lindsay Lohan’s unfortunate overdose, while not fatal, excites much attention. But these are things that do not need to worry me.

The next day I am up early for a swim in the pool and raring to make a start on the script. I cook myself an omelette and brew up an enormous pot of coffee – the suites in the Chateau come with splendid kitchens – and settle down at my desk, photographs of Guy Gibson, Barnes Wallis and a Lancaster bomber Blu-tacked up on the wall to inspire me. What could be more agreeable?

But there is a problem.

A terrible problem.

I cannot write.

My fingers go to the keyboard and I force them to type out.


FADE IN:

INT. THE AIR MINISTRY – EVENING, 1940


And that is as far as I can get.

Ridiculous.

I stand up and walk about the room. This can be no more than initial nerves. It is a potentially big project. The original film is one of my favourites. I am anxious about my right to tinker with this magnificent story. Sit down again and get on with it, Stephen.

But it is more than that. As I stare at the screen I feel that there is a void inside me, a dark space. What can it be, this sucking black hole that is somewhere between hunger, fear, dread and pain?

I shake my head and then my whole body, like a dog emerging from a bath.

It will pass.

I leave the room and descend in the elevator, listening to a couple swapping gossip on the subject of Lindsay Lohan’s dramatic departure from the hotel the night before.

I pace around the pool. Jerry Stiller, comedian and father of the actor Ben, is doing a few slow lengths.

‘Hiya, kid,’ he calls out. I do love, at the age of forty-nine, to be called kid.

After ten or twenty circuits I return to the room and sit once more before the screen.

The black hole is still there.

This is all terribly, terribly wrong.

What can it be? What can it be? Am I ill?

And then with a bolt of certainty that almost knocks me from my chair I realize what it is.

I need a cigarette. I cannot write without a cigarette.

It can’t be true. Surely?

For the next three hours I try everything I can to get the writing juices going, but by midday I realize that it is useless. Either I do not deliver the screenplay or I smoke. I lift the telephone receiver.

‘Hello, it’s Stephen here. Could you send up a carton of Marlboro please? Yes a whole carton. Ten packs. Thanks. Bye.’


Fast forward to April the following year, 2007. In July the ban on smoking in public will come into force throughout the United Kingdom, and the month after that I will be fifty. Now, surely, it is time to give up once and for all. I have been hypnotized by Paul McKenna in an attempt to remove the hard wiring in my brain that associates writing with tobacco. I have been given a session at the Allen Carr ‘Easy Way’ clinic in London. Neither seems to have been much use, grateful as I am to each for offering help. But there is good news …

A new drug has arrived. Farewell Zyban, hello Champix, Pfizer’s name for a new compound called varenicline, which is not an anti-depressant but a ‘nicotinic receptor partial agonist’. What could be whatter?

I have a course prescribed and, as with the Zyban, I continue smoking as if nothing has happened. On about the tenth day I notice that my ashtray is filled with absurdly long stubs. I have taken no more than one puff from each. By the end of the second week I find myself taking cigarettes out of the pack, staring at them as if they are strangers and replacing them. During this time we are taping QI two or three times a week. When that finishes I find that I am no longer buying packs of cigarettes. I have stopped smoking.

I drive up to Norfolk and start filming for a new series of Kingdom. When this concludes at the end of September I fly to America to start work on a travel series.

The real test comes later, however. In May 2008 I return to Britain from Hawaii, the last state to be visited for the documentary, and I need to sit down to write the book of the series. Only now will I see if I can, for the first time in my life, write something more than journalism, letters and occasional blogs without consuming cigarette after cigarette as I type.

It seems, when that day dawns, that my thirty-five-year relationship with tobacco really is over.

Writing these words as I have been, sitting in front of a computer, and recalling the past, has the old urge returned? The experience has not opened up that black hole, but somewhere, deep inside me, a trace memory twitches and thrashes like a dragon in a cave sleeping a restless sleep.

Have I betrayed a way of looking at the world? Have I turned my back on freedom, perversity and outsiderism? Have I bourgeoisified and sold out? Most would think the question preposterous, but I do not. While the nicotine habit might rightly be characterized as dirty, dangerous, anti-social, ontologically pointless and physically deleterious and while those in its thrall might be regarded as reckless, foolish, self-indulgent, weak and perverse, I still find myself drawn to smokers and irritated by those who nag and bully them.

I was at a dinner party many years ago, sitting along from Tom Stoppard, who in those days smoked not just between courses, but between mouthfuls. An American woman opposite watched in disbelief.

‘And you so intelligent!’

‘Excuse me?’ said Tom.

‘Knowing that those things are going to kill you,’ she said, ‘still you do it.’

‘How differently I might behave,’ Tom said, ‘if immortality were an option.’


Substances seem insignificant compared to the big things in life: Work, Faith, Knowledge, Hope, Fear and Love. But the appetites that drive us and our susceptibility, resistance, acceptance and denial of substances define and reveal us at least as much as abstract expressions of belief or bald recitations of action and achievement.

Maybe it’s just me. Maybe other people have greater control over their appetites and less interest in them. I seem to have been driven by greedy need and needy greed all my life.





College to Colleague





Cambridge

The Winter of Discontent, they called it. Strikes by lorry drivers, car workers, nurses, ambulance drivers, railwaymen, refuse collectors and gravediggers. I don’t suppose I had ever been happier.

After all the storm-tossed derangement of my teenage years – love, shame, theft, scandal, expulsion, attempted suicide, fraud, arrest, imprisonment and sentencing – I finally seemed to have found something close to equilibrium and fulfilment. Seemed. Smoking a pipe as a placid and confident figure of authority in a small prep school was one thing. Now here I was at a huge university starting all over again as a new boy, a fresher, a nobody.

It is natural for people to despise the very idea of Oxford and Cambridge. Elitist, snobbish, hidebound, self-satisfied, arrogant and remote, the Ancient Universities, as they conceitedly style themselves, seem to embody the irrelevant, archaic, moribund and shameful past that Britain appears to be trying so hard to shed. And Oxbridge doesn’t fool anybody with all that flannel about ‘meritocracy’ and ‘excellence’. Are we supposed to be impressed by the silly names they give themselves? Fellows and stewards and deans and dons and proctors and praelectors. And as for the students, or undergraduates, I beg their pompous pardons …

Many people, but especially I think the young, see pretension and performance all around them. They will read attitudinizing and posturing in every gesture. If they were to walk down Trinity Street in Cambridge during term time they would encounter youthful men and women that it would be very easy to characterize as self-conscious poseurs or play-acting pricks. Oh, they think they’re so intellectual; oh, they think they’re so Brideshead Revisited; oh, they think they’re so la crème de la crème. Look at the way they bicycle along the cobbles with their arms folded, too cool to touch the handlebars. See how they walk along with their head in a book. See how they wrap their scarves around their necks with a flick. As if we’re supposed to be impressed. Listen to their drawly public-school voices. Or, worse, listen to their fake street accents. Who do they think they are, who do they bloody think they bloody are? Mow the fuckers down.

Well. Quite. But imagine for a moment that these wanky arsehole poseurs are actually no more than young men and women with real lives and real feelings just like anybody else, just like me and just like you. Imagine that they are quite as scared and unsure and hopeful and daft as you and me. Imagine that instant contempt and dislike really says more about the onlooker than about them. Then imagine something further. Imagine that just about every single student newly arrived at such a place as Cambridge went through exactly those same feelings of dislike, distrust and fear when looking at the easy and assured second- and third-years milling around them with all their relaxed confidence and their superior air of assurance and belonging. Imagine that they too had compensated for such feelings of nervous inadequacy by choosing to ‘see through’ everyone else, by choosing to believe that those around them were pitiful poseurs. And imagine finally that without their noticing it they somehow became absorbed and naturalized into the place to such an extent that now, to an outsider, they are the ones who look like arrogant tossers. Inside, you can take my word for it, they are still shrinking and shrivelling like salted snails. I know, because I was one, just as you would have been too.

It is true that I was a scholar. It is true that I was older than my first-year contemporaries. True also that I had more experience of the ‘real world’ (whatever that might be supposed to be) than most. True as well that, unlike a surprising number of those arriving at university, I was very used to being away from home, having been sent to my first boarding school at the age of seven. True too that I had an apparently assured manner and a deep, resonant voice that made me sound as if I belonged to the place quite as much as the wooden panels, shaved lawns and bowler-hatted porters. I concede all that, but it is very important that you understand nonetheless how very scared I was inside. I lived, you see, in quivering dread of being at any moment found out. No, it wasn’t my status as a convicted criminal on probation that I wanted kept secret, nor my past history as thief, liar, forger and gaolbird. As far as I was concerned those home truths were perfectly fit for broadcast, as was my sexuality, my ethnicity or any other thing of that nature. No, the terror that gripped me during those first few weeks at Cambridge was all about my intellectual right to be there. My dread was that someone would approach and ask me, in front of a crowd of sneering onlookers, my opinion of Lermontov or Superstring Theory or the Categorical Imperatives of Kant. I would prevaricate and palter in my usual plausible way, but, this being Cambridge, such stratagems would cut no ice with my remorseless and (in my imagination) gleefully malicious interrogator, who would stare at me with gimlet eyes and say in a harsh voice that crackled with mocking laughter: ‘Excuse me, but do you even know who Lermontov is?’ Or Rilke or Hayek or Saussure or some other name my ignorance of which would reveal the awful shallowness of my so-called education.

At any moment it would come to light that my scholarship had been wrongly awarded, that there had been a muddle with examination papers and some poor genius called Simon Frey or Steven Pry had been cheated of their proper place. A relentless public inquisition would follow in which I would be exposed as a dull-witted fake who had no business at a serious university. I could even picture the ceremony in which I was formally ejected from the college gates, slinking away to the sound of jeers and whistles. An institution like Cambridge was for other people, insiders, club members, the chosen – for them.

You may think I am exaggerating, and perhaps I am. But by no more than 5 per cent. All those thoughts truly did spin around in my head, and I really did fear that I had no right to be a Cambridge undergraduate, and that this truth would soon become obvious, along with academic and intellectual deficiencies that would reveal me to be entirely unworthy of matriculation.

Part of the reason I felt all this is because I think I had a much higher doctrine of Cambridge than most undergraduates. I believed in it completely. I worshipped it. I had chosen it above Oxford or any other university because … because of … oh dear, there is no way of explaining this without sounding appallingly precious.

My favourite twentieth-century author in those days was E. M. Forster. I hero-worshipped him and G. E. Moore and the Cambridge Apostles and their associated Bloomsbury satellites Goldsworthy Lowes Dickinson and Lytton Strachey as well as the more illustrious planets in that system, Bertrand Russell, John Maynard Keynes and Ludwig Wittgenstein. I admired especially the cult of personal relations that Forster espoused. His view that friendship, warmth and honesty between people mattered more than any cause or any system of belief was for me a practical as well as a romantic ideal.

‘I hate the idea of causes,’ he wrote, ‘and if I had to choose between betraying my country and betraying my friend I hope I should have the guts to betray my country.’ That claim, from an essay called ‘What I Believe’ and published in his collection Two Cheers for Democracy, was taken by some to be all but treasonable. Given his connections to the group later known as the Cambridge Spies, it may be easy to see why such a credo still causes unease. He knew that, of course, for he went on to write:


Such a choice may scandalise the modern reader, and he may stretch out his patriotic hand to the telephone at once and ring up the police. It would not have shocked Dante, though. Dante places Brutus and Cassius in the lowest circle of Hell because they had chosen to betray their friend Julius Caesar rather than their country Rome.


I know how insufferably awful I must appear when I tell you that I wanted to go to Cambridge because of the Bloomsbury Group and a parcel of poofy old bien-pensant writers and traitors, but there we are. It wasn’t because of Peter Cook and John Cleese and the tradition of comedy, much as I admired that, nor was it because of Isaac Newton and Charles Darwin and the tradition of science, much as I admired that too. Cambridge’s beauty as a university town had some influence, I suppose. I saw it before I ever saw Oxford, and it pierced my heart in a way that first love always does. But it really was, pretentious as it may sound, the intellectual and the ethical tradition that appealed to my puritanical and self-righteous soul. I had emerged from a monstrous youth, you must remember, and I suppose I felt I needed the holy fires of Cambridge to cleanse me.

‘Cambridge produces martyrs and Oxford burns them.’ I honestly cannot remember if that phrase is my own or whether I borrowed it from somebody else: I seem to be credited with it on the web, which proves nothing, of course. Anyway, it is true that Martyrs’ Memorial in Oxford commemorates the burning of the three Cambridge divines Hugh Latimer, Nicholas Ridley and Thomas Cranmer in the city of Oxford. There has always been a sense that Oxford is a worldly, political and establishment institution, strong in humanities and history, and that Cambridge is more idealistic, iconoclastic and dissident, strong in mathematics and science. Certainly Oxford has provided Britain with twenty-six prime ministers where Cambridge has managed only fifteen. It is indicative too that Oxford was the Royalist headquarters during the English Civil War while Cambridge was a Parliamentarian stronghold; indeed Oliver Cromwell was a Cambridge alumnus and local to the area. Roundhead Cambridge, Cavalier Oxford. This pattern is repeated in theology – the tractarian Oxford movement is high church to the point of being Romish, whereas Wescott House and Ridley Hall in Cambridge are low to the point of being evangelical.

This same doctrinal distinction is even to be seen in comedy, mad as that may sound. Robert Hewison (an Oxonian) in his excellent book Monty Python: The Case Against shows how the great Pythons were divided along Oxford and Cambridge lines. Those long lean Cantabrigians (Virginia Woolf had noted fifty years earlier how Cambridge breeds them taller than Oxford) Cleese, Chapman and Idle were all icy logic, sarcasm, cruelty and verbal play while the Oxonians Jones and Palin were warmer, sillier and more surreal. ‘Let’s have a dozen Pantomime Princess Margarets running over a hill!’ Jones might suggest, to which Cleese would coldly riposte, ‘Why?’

The creative tension between those two in particular, according to Hewison, formed the heart and soul of what Python was. You might see the same thing in the differences between Cambridge’s Peter Cook and Jonathan Miller and Oxford’s Dudley Moore and Alan Bennett. It is more than possible that you find the cuddly Dudley and the even cuddlier Alan Bennett and Michael Palin much more likeable than their tall, aloof and rather forbidding Cambridge counterparts. And perhaps this extends down to the later incarnations – Oxford’s Rowan Atkinson and Richard Curtis are shorter and surely sweeter than the lofty and fractious Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie.



Cableknit Pullover, Part 1.



The backlit ears of Hugh Laurie, gentleman.



Cableknit Pullover, Part 2.

There is tremendous romance in the cavalier tradition and absolutely none in the puritan. Oscar Wilde was an Oxford man, and a great part of me is deeply drawn to the Oxford of the aesthetic movement, Arnold’s ‘Scholar-Gipsy’ and the Dreaming Spires. But the pull of Cambridge was always stronger; Forster’s world marked me for her own at some point in my teenage years and thenceforward it was Cambridge or nowhere.

All of which goes some way towards explaining, perhaps, why I was so nervous about being found out. It was obvious to me that Cambridge, the Mecca of the Mind, would be filled with the most intellectually accomplished people in the world. Students of organic chemistry would be familiar with Horace and Heidegger, and classicists would know the laws of thermodynamics and the poetry of Empson. I was unworthy.

I would have had to be epically delusional or truly, medically paranoiac not to recognize such insecurities for what they were: a mixture of too idealistic a sense of what Cambridge was, allied to lashings of the worst kind of late adolescent solipsistic angst. I had never fitted in at school and, now that I was come to a place almost expressly designed to suit me, suppose I turned out to be unable to fit in there too? What did that say about me? It was too frightening to contemplate.

But the first two weeks at a university are designed, which is to say they have evolved, to enforce the realization amongst freshers that everybody is in the same punt and that everything will be fine. Besides which, after a few days I had met enough people and overheard enough conversations to realize that Cambridge was far from fifth-century Athens or fifteenth-century Florence.

University life begins with the Freshers’ Fair and all kinds of ‘squashes’ – recruitment parties thrown by student clubs and societies. What with the comparatively healthy bank balance of a student in the first week of their academic year on the one hand and that keen desire to be accepted and loved that flows from all the insecurities I have described on the other, it is likely that a fresher will join any number of extracurricular groups in their first week, from the established – the Footlights Club, Varsity magazine and the Cambridge Union, to the weird – the Friends of the Illuminati, the Society of Tobacco Worshippers and the Beaglers Against Racism. All very silly and studenty and adorable.





College and Class

I suppose I am going to have to stop off here and explain in the briefest and simplest of terms, if I can, the nature of collegiate life at Cambridge. Only Oxford has a comparable system, and there is no reason why anyone should understand how it works without having lived inside it. And, of course, no reason why anyone should care. Unless you are curious, in which case I love you, for curiosity about the world and all its corners is a beautiful thing, even if those corners are as uncool as the cloisters of Oxbridge.

There are twenty-five Cambridge colleges (well thirty-one in all, but two of those are for postgraduates and the other four only accept mature students), each of which is a self-governing institution with its own history, income, property and statutes. Trinity College is the largest, with 700 undergraduate students. It is also the wealthiest of all Oxbridge colleges, worth hundreds of millions and owning land everywhere. Others are poorer: in the fifteenth century Queens’ was a big supporter of King Richard III, whose boar’s head device still flies from college banners, and it consequently suffered from confiscations and other financial penalties following that unfortunate monarch’s defeat on Bosworth Field.

Each college has a hall for dining, a chapel, a library, senior and junior combination rooms (common rooms at Oxford) and a porter’s lodge. They are mostly medieval in fabric and they are all medieval in structure and governance. They are entered by towered gateways and laid out in lawned and cobbled courts (at Oxford these are called quads). You would not design an educational establishment from scratch along these peculiar lines, and indeed no one ever has. Yet for over 800 years the two collegiate universities have run continuously without a break and there has been no cause to change the fundamental principles that organize them, except through the slowest and most immeasurably gradual evolution. Whether Oxford and Cambridge can survive the envy, resentment, dislike and distrust of future generations we can only guess. It is perfectly possible that someone will attach to them the hideous word ‘inappropriate’ or the hideous phrase ‘not fit for purpose’ and they will be turned into museums, heritage centres or hotels. No one can stop them from being historic, however, and without vandalism they cannot prevent them from being physically beautiful either. Those two qualities alone will ensure that, come what may, young people will want to go to them in sufficient numbers to risk their being considered elitist.

An Oxbridge student is given a place, not by the university, but by his or her college and it is there that they will live and take their instruction in the form of tutorials – which at Cambridge are called supervisions. The average number of undergraduate students at a college is about 300. When I arrived at Queens’ in October 1978, there were five others reading English in my intake. Or was it six? I know one changed to theology, and two others dropped out altogether. No matter. The university, as distinct from the colleges, runs the faculties (History, Philosophy, Law, Classics, Medicine and so on) with their tenured readers, lecturers and professors. In my time Queens’ had three English Literature Fellows (or ‘dons’) who were also attached to the university’s English faculty, although it is perfectly possible to be a Fellow within a college, taking supervisions and teaching undergraduates and yet be without a faculty post. Oh lord, this is so complicated and dull … I can almost hear your eyes glazing over.

Look at it this way. You live and eat in your college and attend supervisions arranged by the dons in your college for which your write essays, but you go to lectures and are ultimately examined by the university faculties which are outside the college. There is no campus, but there are faculty buildings, lecture theatres, exams schools and so on. Would it help if I said colleges are like Hogwarts houses, Hufflepuff and Ravenclaw and so on? I have a horrible feeling it might …

The Queens’ College of St Margaret and St Bernard is one of the oldest in the university. It is also one of the prettiest, with a divine half-timbered cloister court, a charming medieval Hall, all done over by Thomas Bodley and Burne-Jones at the height of the late pre-Raphaelite period, and a famous wooden structure known as the Mathematical Bridge that spans the River Cam and connects the old part of the college with the new. When I arrived in 1978 Queens’ was still an all-male institution. Girton, the first women’s college, started taking men the following year, while the more advanced King’s and Clare had been mixed for six years, but Queens’ was carrying on in much the way it had for more than half a millennium. Incidentally, the apostrophe after the ‘s’ is there on account of it being founded by two queens, Margaret of Anjou and Elizabeth Woodville. In Le Keux’s Memorials of Cambridge, which I am sure you have read, but I will remind you anyway, the author, writing in about 1840, spells the name of the college as Queen’s College, and appends a footnote:


A custom has arisen latterly of writing the name Queens’ College, as being the foundation of two queens. This appears to us an unnecessary refinement. We have the authority of Erasmus against it, who always calls his college ‘Collegium Reginae’.


‘Reginae’ is of course Latin for ‘of the Queen’, in the singular. God, I sound like a guide book. Not surprising, as I’m quoting from the college website. Anyway, there you are.

As the only English scholar in my year I had been allocated a rather fabulous set of rooms overlooking the President’s Gardens. That’s another idiosyncratic Oxbridge nonsense – the titles given to heads of houses. Some are Masters or Mistresses, others are Wardens, Provosts, Principals or Rectors and a few, as is the case with Queens’, are styled President.

On the day I arrived I stood at the bottom of my staircase and for ten minutes I played with the exquisitely exciting proof that, for the time being at least, I truly was a Cambridge undergraduate. You see, each staircase has at its entrance a wooden board on which are hand-painted the names of the occupants residing within. Next to each name is a sliding block of wood that obscures or reveals the words IN and OUT, so that when a student (or Fellow, for the dons have rooms in college too) passes the board on their way to or from their rooms they can signal their presence or absence to an anxious and expectant world. I was happily flicking my block of wood back and forth and would still have been doing so to this very day if the sound of approaching footsteps hadn’t sent me scuttling up to my rooms.

I had arrived that afternoon with a collection of carefully chosen books, a typewriter, a gramophone, a pile of records, some posters and a bust of Shakespeare, all of which were soon disposed about the rooms in as pleasing and artfully artless an arrangement as I could contrive. Undergraduate sets are composed of a bedroom, a main room and a gyp-room, or kitchen. Gyp was the unfortunate nickname for a college servant: the more appealing Oxonian appellation is ‘scout’, but I’m not going to get side-tracked with Oxbridge minutiae again, I promise. I know how much it upsets you.

I had determined that I would go out later for coffee, milk and other staples. For the moment I was content to sit alone but for two dozen or so invitations carefully laid out on my desk. In the days before email and mobile phones, communication was managed by notes left in a student’s pigeonhole in the porter’s lodge. If someone wanted to contact you it was much easier for them to leave a message there than to have the fag of climbing all the way to your rooms and slipping it under your door. I had already gone down to the porter’s lodge three times in the last hour to see if any more invitations had come in. The pigeonholes were arranged and colour-coded according to undergraduate year. Thus a club or society could undertake a mass leafleting of first-years, a kind of targeted spamming. Hence the quantity of paper spread out on my desk. The invitations to squashes being held by sporting, political or religious societies I had instantly thrown away, but I had grouped together invitations from dramatic and literary clubs, magazines and journals. What about the Cambridge University Gay Society? I was undecided about this. I liked the idea of pinning my pink colours to the mincey mast but was wary of being involved in anything campaigning or strident. In those days I was a most conservative or at least actively inactive sort of figure politically. In the jargon of the day, my consciousness was unawakened.

Invitations to sherry parties held by the college’s Senior Tutor, by the Dean of Chapel and by an entirely different person also claiming the title of Dean were not to be refused, I was told. Also essential was a gathering in the rooms of A. C. Spearing, the college’s senior English Fellow, who was to be, it seemed, my Director of Studies. The most impressive and formal invitation, all pasteboard, gold embossing and armorial bearings, was the one summoning me to the Queens’ College Matriculation Dinner, a formal event in which the entire intake of first-years would be officially received and enrolled as members of the college.

And so I embarked on this round of parties and introductory gatherings. In A. C. Spearing’s rooms I met my fellow English Literature freshers. We stuck together in the first week, accompanied each other to assorted squashes and introductory lectures, swapped second-hand gossip and sized each other up academically, intellectually, socially and in one or two cases I suppose, sexually. We were very typical of our generation. We knew T. S. Eliot backwards but could barely quote a line of Spenser or Dryden between us. With the exception of one of our number we would have looked like, to an outside observer, as prize a parcel of punchably pompous and buttoned-up arseholes as ever was assembled in one place. The exception was a bondage-trousered, leather-jacketed, henna-haired youth called Dave Huggins. He looked like the kind of punk rocker you would cross the King’s Road in Chelsea to avoid. Despite being far and away the friendliest and most approachable of our group he scared the hell out of me and I think out of everybody else too. Something in my booming voice and apparently confident manner seemed to appeal to him, however, or amuse him at least, and he dubbed me the King.

For all his forbidding street aspect, Dave had been to school at Radley, one of the smarter public schools: in fact almost all of us in the English Literature intake had been privately educated. Unsure of ourselves and nervous of being found academically wanting as we may have been, I cannot imagine how alarmingly and alienatingly at home we must have seemed to those arriving from state schools, to that cadre of young men and women who had never before stayed away from home and never before met public-school product en masse. Some months later a student who had been educated at a comprehensive in south-east London told me that for weeks he had been unable to understand what ‘say gid’ meant. He kept hearing it everywhere: ‘Say gid! That’s jarst say gid!’ Eventually he realized that it was how the upper middle-class pronounce ‘So good, that’s just so good.’ He observed how strange it was for him to be in the minority. Some 3 per cent of the population received private education in those days and here he was – one of the great 97 per cent, but somehow feeling like a chimney sweep who has gatecrashed a Hunt Ball. No matter how much Cambridge might have presented itself as a purely academic institution whose only criterion for entry was academic, the dominant accent to be heard was public school. It took a very special kind of self-belief and strength of character not to feel angry or out of place in such an environment.

I have no idea what kind of figure I cut. Well, no that’s not true. I am afraid I have all too clear an idea of what kind of a figure I cut. My typical mode of dress was a Harris tweed jacket with leather buttons, Viyella shirt and knitted tie, V-neck lambswool sweater, corduroy trousers of lovat green and brown half-brogue shoes polished to a high gloss. With my trademark flop of hair and a pipe clamped between my teeth I looked like what I of course had been all the previous year, an assistant master from a small rural prep school, perhaps with something of the air of a Second World War back-room boffin. Whatever impression I gave it certainly wasn’t that of a hip young rocker in the age of The Clash and The Damned.





Chess, Classics, Classical Composers, Curiosity and Cheating

It turned out that Queens’ did indeed have two deans, a Dean of Chapel, and a Dean in charge of discipline. At each of the first-week decanal sherry parties I found myself falling into conversation with a first-year called Kim Harris. He was handsome in a way that reminded me of a young Richard Burton and radiated a powerful mixture of severity, secrecy, relish and surprise that I could not but find intriguing. Like me he was separated from other freshers by appearing on the one hand more mature and adult while on the other exhibiting an unembarrassedly high doctrine of what Cambridge ought to be. He was educated, I soon discovered, at Bolton School, an independent day school that a generation or two earlier had thrown Ian McKellen at Cambridge and a grateful world. Kim had come to Queens’ to read Classics. He dressed rather like me but in Church’s full brogues and V-necks of the purest and priciest cashmere. He was even capable of wearing a bowtie without looking absurd, which is a very great human skill indeed. We became instant friends in the way that only the young can. We did not consider going to any party or event except in each other’s company.

‘Are you gay?’ I asked him quite early on.

‘Let’s just say that I know what I like,’ was his prim and opaque reply.



Kim Harris. Not unlike a young blond Richard Burton.

Aside from his proficiency at Latin and Greek Kim had another skill and at a level of brilliance that seemed to me to be quite superhuman. He was a chess Master. At Bolton he had played with, and to some extent mentored, Nigel Short, who was already becoming well known as the greatest prodigy England had ever produced. At the age of ten Short had beaten the great Viktor Korchnoi and now at fourteen was on the verge of becoming the youngest International Master in history. Kim was ‘just’ a Master, but that meant he was skilful enough to play blindfold, a trick I never tired of urging him to perform. Without any sight of the board he would demolish all comers.

When I first saw him do this it reminded me to raise a point with him.

‘Kim,’ I said, ‘when we very first met at one of those sherry parties I remember we looked at a chessboard in the Dean’s rooms, and I asked you if you played chess.’

‘So you did.’

‘And do you remember what you replied?’

Kim raised his eyebrows. ‘I don’t think so.’

‘You said, “Let’s just say, I know the moves.” ’

‘Well, I do.’

‘You know a bit more than the moves,’ I said.

‘Your point being?’

‘My point being, if that’s how you answer someone who asks you if you play chess, how am I to interpret it when you answer the question, “Are you gay?” with the words “Let’s just say, I know what I like”?’

Kim’s family was well off, and they lavished upon their only son every imaginable luxury, including a magnificent Bang and Olufsen stereo system on which Kim played Wagner. And sang to Wagner. And conducted Wagner. And lived Wagner.

I had fallen for Wagner’s music myself when young but I had never penetrated the mysteries of the full works. Aside from anything else I had never been able to afford the huge box sets. As well as Lohengrins and Meistersingers and a Parsifal or two Kim had two complete Ring cycles on record: Karl Böhm’s live Bayreuth recording and the great Decca studio production of the Solti Ring, one of the masterpieces of the gramophone age. I know how bored and restless people become at talk of Wagner so I won’t dwell on him at length. Let it just be said that Kim completed my Wagnerian education, and for that alone I would be grateful to him for ever.

He and I and a friend of his from Bolton called Peter Speak, who was reading Philosophy, would sit around discovering late nineteenth-century masterpieces over which to go into ecstasies. Strauss, Schoenberg, Brahms, Mahler and Bruckner were our gods and Kim’s B&O our temple.

Given that Britain was boiling with anarchic post-punk creativity, the political excitements of multiple strikes and the election of Margaret Thatcher to the leadership of the Conservative Party, that there was rubbish piling up on the streets, corpses going unburied and inflation rocketing skywards, given all that, a knot of tweedy Cambridge late adolescents gasping at the wonder of Strauss’s Metamorphosis and Schoenberg’s Transfigured Night seems … seems what? Perfectly legitimate. Entirely in accordance with what education is supposed to be. Education is the sum of what students teach each other in between lectures and seminars. You sit in each other’s rooms and drink coffee – I suppose it would be vodka and Red Bull now – you share enthusiasms, you talk a lot of wank about politics, religion, art and the cosmos and then you go to bed, alone or together according to taste. I mean, how else do you learn anything, how else do you take your mind for a walk? Nonetheless, I’m slightly shocked at how earnest and dull a picture I present in my tweed jacket and corduroys, puffing at a pipe and listening to all that German Late Romantic noise. Is that where it all went wrong? Or is that where it all went right?

There is that in student life which reinforces the connection between the words ‘university’ and ‘universal’. All divisions of life are there, and all the circles and sodalities, coteries and cliques that you will find in the wider human cosmos can be found in the swirling flux of young people who shape and define a university for the three or four years of their tenancy.

Whenever I return to Cambridge I wander the familiar streets as a stranger. I know and love the architecture intimately, but while the chapels and colleges, courts, bridges and towers are what they have always been, Cambridge is entirely different each time. You cannot step into the same river twice, observed Heraclitus, for fresh water is always flowing over you. You cannot step into the same Cambridge twice, or the same Bristol, or Warwick, or Leeds or any such place, for fresh generations are for ever repopulating and redefining them. The buildings are frozen, but a university is not its buildings, it is those that inhabit and use them.

I discovered brilliant people and dunces and everything in between. There were the lively and there were the preternaturally dull. Every imaginable special interest was represented. You could spend your three years as an undergraduate on sports fields and never know there were any theatres. You could involve yourself in politics and be wholly unaware of orchestras or choirs. You could hunt with beagle packs, sail, dance, play bridge, build a computer or tend a garden. Just as you can at hundreds of universities, of course. It is only that Cambridge has the advantage of being both bigger and smaller than most. Smaller because you are in a college of perhaps 300; bigger because the whole university numbers over 20,000, which confers some sort of an advantage when it comes to audiences and participants in sport and drama, readership circulations for magazines and captive markets for all sorts of enterprises and undertakings.

I need not, of course, have worried that I would be quizzed and found wanting on the subject of Russian poets or the principles of particle physics; the fear proved groundless that I would find myself in such rarefied heights of academic brilliance that I would be unable to breathe.

To do well at exams (in the field of literature and the arts at least) it is better to be a hedgehog than a fox, if I can borrow Isaiah Berlin’s famous distinction. In other words, it is better to know one big thing than lots of smaller things. A point of view, a single way of thinking that encompasses all elements of a subject, allows essays more or less to write themselves. The way to pass exams is to cheat. I cheated all the way through my three years at Cambridge. Which is not to say that I looked at the work of the student next to me, or that I brought in outside material from which to crib. I cheated by knowing in advance exactly what I was going to write before the invigilator bid us turn over the question sheets and started the clock. I had a theory of Shakespearean tragic and comic forms, for example, which I won’t bore you with and which is probably specious, or at least no more truthful or persuasive an overall interpretation of Shakespeare’s forms than any other. Its virtue was that it answered any question and yet always appeared to be specific. I had found part of it in an essay by Anne Barton (née Righter). She is a fine Shakespearean scholar, and I filleted and regurgitated some of her ideas for both Parts One and Two of the tripos (Cambridge calls its degree examination the tripos, something to do with the three-legged stool on which students used to sit when taking them). In both of the Shakespeare papers I got a First. In fact in Part Two it was the top First for the entire university. It was essentially the same essay each time. It only takes a paragraph at the top to twist the question such that your essay answers it. Let’s say, in simple terms, that my essay proposes that Shakespeare’s comedies, even the ‘Festive’ ones, play with being tragedies while his tragedies play with being comedies. The point is that you can trot this essay out no matter what the question. ‘Shakespeare’s real voice is in his comedies’: Discuss. ‘King Lear is Shakespeare’s only likeable tragic hero’: Discuss. ‘Shakespeare outgrew his comedies.’ ‘Shakespeare put his talent into his comedies and his genius into his tragedies.’ ‘Tragedies are adolescent, comedies are adult.’ ‘Shakespeare cares about gender, but not about sex.’ Discuss, discuss, discuss, discuss, discuss, discuss. I did, of course, no such vulgar thing as discuss. All my ducks were in a row when I walked into the examination hall and I had to do no more than point their beaks at the question.

Of course, having a good memory helped … I had enough quotations in my head, both from the works and from Shakespearean critics and scholars, to be able to pepper my essay with acute references. So creepily good was that memory that I was always able to include Act, Scene and Line numbers for every play quotation or to place in brackets the source and date of any critical reference I cited (Witwatersrand Review, Vol. 3, Sept. 75, ed. Jablonski, Yale Books, 1968, that sort of thing). I am aware that to be given a good memory at birth is worth more than almost any other accomplishment but I believe too that it is as rare for one person to be born with a physically better memory as it is for them to be born with better fingers or better legs. There are young men and women up and down the land who happily (or unhappily) tell anyone who will listen that they don’t have an academic turn of mind, or that they aren’t lucky enough to have been blessed with a good memory, and yet can recite hundreds of pop lyrics and reel off any amount of information about footballers, cars and celebrities. Why? Because they are interested in those things. They are curious. If you are hungry for food you are prepared to hunt high and low for it. If you are hungry for information it is the same. Information is all around us, now more than ever before in human history. You barely have to stir or incommode yourself to find things out. The only reason people do not know much is because they do not care to know. They are incurious. Incuriosity is the oddest and most foolish failing there is.

Picture the world as being a city whose pavements are covered a foot deep in gold coins. You have to wade through them to make progress. Their clinking and rattling fills the air. Imagine that you met a beggar in such a city.

‘Please, give me something. I am penniless.’

‘But look around you,’ you would shout. ‘There is gold enough to last you your whole life. All you have to do is to bend down and pick it up!’

When people complain that they don’t know any literature because it was badly taught at school, or that they missed out on history because on the timetable it was either that or biology, or some such ludicrous excuse, it is hard not to react in the same way.

‘But it’s all around you!’ I want to scream. ‘All you have to do it bend down and pick it up!’ What on earth people think their lack of knowledge of the Hundred Years War, or Socrates, or the colonization of Batavia has to do with school I have no idea. As one who was expelled from any number of educational establishments and never did any work at any of them, I know perfectly well that the fault lay not in the staff but in my self that I was ignorant. Then one day, or over the course of time, I got greedy. Greedy to know things, greedy for understanding, greedy for information. I was always to some extent like that robot Number 5 in the movie Short Circuit who whizzes about shrieking, ‘Input! Input!’ Memorizing for me became like eating Sugar Puffs, an endless stuffing of myself.

I do not say that this hunger for learning was morally, intellectually or stylistically admirable. I think it was a little like ambition, a little like many of the later failings in my life we will come to: membership of so many clubs, ownership of so many credit cards … it was part of wanting to belong, of feeling the need constantly to connect myself. Rather vulgar, rather pushy.

While the manner and motives of it may not have been magnificent the end result was certainly useful. The urgent desire to pack the mind, my insatiable curiosity and appetite for knowledge led to all kinds of advantages. Facile exam passing was one such. I had never found written tests under time pressure anything other than enjoyable and easy. That is because of my fundamental dishonesty. I never tried to engage authentically or truthfully with an intellectual issue or to answer a question. I only tried to show off and in the course of my life I have met few people who are my equal at that undignified art. There are plenty who are more obviously show-offy than I am, but that is what is so creepy about my particular brand of exhibitionism – I mask it in a cloak of affable modesty and touching false diffidence. To be less hard on myself, I think these displays of affability, modesty and diffidence may once have been false but have now become pretty much real, in much the same way that the conscious manner we decide to sign our names in our teens will slowly stop being affected and become our real signature. The mask if worn long enough will be the face.

All of which seems a long way from a memoir of university life, which is what this chapter is supposed to offer. The life of a student however, especially that of a more than usually self-conscious student in an institution like Cambridge, does involve a great deal of questioning of the mind and intellectual faculties and the meaning and purpose of scholarship, so I think it right to try and fathom what my mind was about in those days.

I went to three lectures in my entire three years. I can remember only two, but I am sure I went to another. The first was an introductory talk on Langland’s Piers Plowman by J. A. W. Bennett, who had been installed as C. S. Lewis’s successor in the chair of Medieval and Renaissance Literature in 1963 and seemed old enough to have lived through much of the period of which he had made himself a master. His lecture was a monumentally dull explanation of why the B-text of Piers Plowman (an achingly long work of Middle English allegorical alliterative verse) was more to be relied upon than the C-text, or possibly the other way around. Professor Bennett begged leave to disagree with W. W. Skeat on the issue of the A-text’s rendering of the Harrowing of Hell, blah-di-blah-di-blah …

That was enough for me. I knew that five minutes in the faculty library would let me dig up a rare enough article in the Sewanee Review or similar to furnish fodder for an essay. Lectures broke into one’s day and were clearly a terrible waste of time. Necessary no doubt if you were reading Law or Medicine or some other vocational subject, but in the case of English the natural thing to do was to talk a lot, listen to music, drink coffee and wine, read books and go to plays.

Perhaps be in plays?


I regularly get letters from aspiring actors or their parents asking for advice. If I get lots, you can imagine how many Ian McKellen, Judi Dench, Simon Russell Beale, David Tennant and other legitimate actors must get. The phrase ‘crowded profession’ is used more for the acting business than for any other I ever heard of and for good reason.

As in so many fields in life there are people out there longing to be given a secret, a way-in, a technique. I can understand it absolutely. Almost as common as the phrase ‘crowded profession’; are phrases that express the idea of ‘just need a break’ and ‘not what you know, but who you know’. I am excluding, for the time being, the whole issue of fame and concentrating exclusively on those who actually care about acting in and of itself: I expect we will come to those who obsess about the ancillary ‘benefits’ of red-carpet recognition and celebrity magazine coverage later.

The letter-writers want to know the best way to achieve a foothold in the acting profession. All that is required, they know, is a chance, one opportunity to shine: their talent, industry and commitment will do the rest. They know, the world knows, how much luck has to do with it. They may have heard about some young striver who wrote a letter to an established actor and got a role as a walk-on in a film, or an audition, or a place at a drama school as a result.

What a creep or ungrateful beast you would have to be not to be moved by the cries of those on the outside who clamour for admission. If you have been lucky enough to advance in the profession surely the least you can do is offer a hand, or a word of helpful advice to those who would emulate you? Absolutely right, but one must be honest too. I can only advise from experience. If someone asks me to how to do something, I cannot answer in the abstract, I can only answer according to my own history. I have absolutely no idea how to become an actor, I can only tell you how I became one. Or at least, how I became a sort of actor who is also a sort of writer who is also a sort of comedian who is also a sort of broadcaster who is also a sort of all sorts of all sorts sort. Sort of. That is the best I can do. I cannot pronounce on whether it is better to go to drama school or not to go, I cannot advise on whether to do rep or street theatre before attempting film or television. I cannot tell you whether it is deleterious or beneficial to the career to take on extra work or accept a part in a soap opera. I simply do not know the answer to these questions because they have never arisen in my life. It would be reckless and irresponsible of me to push someone towards or away from courses of action or inaction of which I know nothing.

So here is how I became an actor.


At prep school the school play was always a musical, so the best casting I could ever hope for would be in the non-singing roles: Mrs Higgins in My Fair Lady was an especial triumph (‘Would grace any drawing-room’ being my first published critical notice). At Uppingham I wrote and performed with my friend Richard Fawcett in comedy sketches for House Suppers, as Christmas entertainments were called there. I also made a mark as a witch in Macbeth. I say ‘made a mark’ because the director – in a burst of creative licence which he must have regretted ever afterwards – thought we should devise our own characters, costumes and props. I went to the butcher’s in Uppingham and procured a bucket of pigs’ guts to pull out of the cauldron for the ‘Eye of toad and ear of newt’ scene. My dear, the smell …

The next time I appeared on stage was at the Norfolk College of Arts and Technology in King’s Lynn. NORCAT’s lecturer in charge of drama was called Bob Pols, and he cast me first as Creon, in a double bill of Sophocles’ Oedipus Rex and Antigone, and then as Lysander in A Midsummer Night’s Dream. I was camp and wore a cricket pullover, as Lysander, that is, not as Creon. My only other dramatic experience took place in a local church performance of Charles Williams’s Thomas Cranmer of Canterbury, a verse play by the ‘other’ member of the Inklings (i.e. the one who wasn’t J. R. R. Tolkien or C. S. Lewis). That was the sum total of my dramatic experience, nativity plays aside, when I arrived at Cambridge. Yet I had it in my head that I was a natural actor, that I knew how to speak lines, that I would have a presence on stage, a weight, a heft, an ability to draw focus when required. I think this was because I was always confident about my voice and my ability to speak verse and to inflect and balance speech properly, without the misplaced emphases and false stresses that I could hear so clearly in the voices of prefects and other amateurs when they read lessons in chapel or recited verse or dramatic lines on stage. The few prizes I had won at school were for poetry reading or recitation of one kind or another. In the same way as one might wince at a discord I would wince at incompetent intonation and wish that I could get up and correct them. Such a point of view now strikes me as arrogance and insolent presumption, but I suppose a conviction that one can do better is a necessary part of the self-belief that is itself a necessary part of pursuing a calling. Heroes matter too. Everyone I’ve ever met whom I have admired has grown up with their own pantheon of heroes. I listened to, watched and admired Robert Donat, Laurence Olivier (of course), Orson Welles, Maggie Smith, James Stewart, Bette Davis, Alistair Sim, Ralph Richardson, John Gielgud, Paul Scofield, Charles Laughton, Marlon Brando (natch), James Mason, Anton Walbrook, Patrick Stewart, Michael Bryant, Derek Jacobi, Ian McKellen and John Wood. There were many others, but those I especially remember. I had not seen a great deal of theatre, but John Wood and Patrick Stewart at the Royal Shakespeare Company had made an enormous impression. I did impersonations of Stewart’s Enobarbus and Cassius in the coach on the way back to school. The others in my list are fairly obvious choices for someone of my background and generation I suppose.

When I was about twelve my parents took me to the Theatre Royal in Norwich with the promise of Sir Laurence Olivier. The play was Somerset Maugham’s Home and Beauty, at least I think it was: memory can conflate different productions and evenings, maybe it was something else. When I settled in my seat and opened the programme I saw that the production was directed by Laurence Olivier. My heart sank. I had so hoped that I would see the theatrical legend in person.

When the play was over my mother asked how I had liked it.

‘It was fine,’ I said, ‘but the best bit was the man who came on as the lawyer at the end. I mean, even the way he took off his hat was extraordinary. Who was he?’

‘But that was Olivier!’ said my mother. ‘Didn’t you realize?’

I can still picture exactly the way he stood on stage, the angle of his head, the extraordinary ability he had to make you all look at each of his fingers one after the other as he tugged off his gloves with aching deliberation. He played a dry-as-dust solicitor in a small comic turn in the play’s last scene, but it was astounding. Shameless exhibitionism, of course. A far cry from the honest gutsy endeavours of a thousand hard-working actors mining for the psychological and emotional truths of their characters in theatres and studios up and down the land, but damn, it was fun. I was pleased at least that I found it amazing even without knowing who the actor was.

So, at Cambridge, although I loved the art and idea of acting, I had no theories about theatre as an agent of social or political change, and no ambition for it as a future career. If I had faith in my potential I certainly had no particular sense that it would be on comic roles that I should concentrate. Quite the reverse. Theatre to me meant, first and foremost, Shakespeare, and the comic roles in the canon – fools, jesters, clowns and mechanicals – didn’t really suit me at all. I was more a Theseus or Oberon than a Bottom or Quince, more a Duke or Jaques than a Touchstone. But first there was the question of whether I would even dare put myself forward for consideration.

Cambridge had dozens and dozens of drama clubs. Each college had its own, and there were others that were university-wide. The major ones, like the Marlowe Society, the Footlights and the Amateur Dramatic Club, had long histories: the Marlowe was started by Justin Brooke and Dadie Rylands a hundred years ago; the ADC and Footlights were older still. Other were more recent – the Mummers had been founded by Alistair Cooke and Michael Redgrave in the early 1930s and clung to a more progressive and avant-garde identity.

Many at Cambridge will tell you that the drama world there is filled with ambitious, pretentious, bitchy wannabes and that the atmosphere of backbiting, jealousy and greasy-pole rivalry is suffocating and unbearable. The people who tell you this are cut from the same cloth as those who grow up these days to become trollers on internet sites and who specialize in posting barbarous, mean, abusive, look-at-me, listen-to-me anonymous comments on YouTube and BBC ‘Have Your Say’ pages and other websites and blogs foolish enough to allow space for their poison. Such swine specialize in second-guessing the motives of those who are brave enough to commit to the risk of making fools of themselves in public and they are a blight on the face of the earth. ‘Oh, but a thick skin is surely necessary in the acting profession. Actors and theatre people should get used to it.’ Well if you want to be in a profession which accesses emotion and attempts to penetrate the mind and soul of man, I should have thought that what is more necessary is a thin skin. Sensitivity. But I am wandering off the point.

I thought, as I settled into my first term, that I should at least go to see some plays and decide whether or not I would be completely outclassed and out of my league. No point in going to auditions if I didn’t have a hope of doing anything more than carry a spear.

I should point out for those unfamiliar with the world of British university drama, that none of this had anything to do with grown-ups – with dons, lecturers, officials or the university departments and faculties. This was all as extra-curricular as drink, sex or sport. I know that in American universities a lot of these activities actually give you points towards your degree, ‘credits’ I believe they are called. Not in Britain. Universities that offer drama courses do exist here – Manchester and Bristol, for example. But not the majority and certainly not Cambridge. Drama and activities of that sort have nothing to do with your academic work, you find your own time to do them. As a result, such pursuits flower, fruit and flourish as nowhere else. If I had had to submit to some drama teacher casting me in plays, directing me or telling me how it was done I should have withered on the vine. The beauty of our way was that everyone was learning as they went along. The actors and directors were all students, as were the lighting, sound, set construction, costume, stage management, production crew, front of house and administration. All were undergraduates saying, ‘Oh, this looks like fun.’

How did they learn? Well, that’s the beauty of university life. You learn on the job and you learn from the second-years and third-years above you, who in turn learned on the job and from those above them. My God, but it is exciting. As exciting as I should find official drama training dull, numbing, embarrassing and humiliating. All you need is enthusiasm, passion, tirelessness and the will, the hunger and the need to do it. But within that range there is plenty of room for the amiable rugger player who thinks it will be larky to be in the chorus of a musical, or the nervous scholarly type who wouldn’t mind a shot at a one-line role in a Shakespeare tragedy just for the sensation of experiencing a play from the inside. You don’t have to be a professional in the making at all.

Where did the money come from to build sets and make costumes? From previous productions. Every drama club had a committee, mostly second- and third-years, and someone on that committee looked after the budgets and the money. It was not just a way of learning about drama, it was a way of learning about committee life, diligence, accounting and all the perils and pitfalls of business and management. Sometimes a don would be asked to sit on the board of a club to help oversee financial matters, but they had no more power over the committee than any other individual member of it. The Footlights, it was rumoured, was the only Cambridge club, in any field, big and profitable enough to have to pay corporation tax. I don’t know if that was true, but the fact that such a rumour could have got about tells you something of the scale of some of these enterprises. The momentum of continuity was a huge part of it. These clubs had been running for so long that it was relatively simple to keep them going.

The first production I went to see was of Tom Stoppard’s Travesties. The play is set in Zurich and somehow combines in a farcical whirl Lenin, who had been exiled there for a while, Tristan Tzara, the Dadaist, the novelist James Joyce and an English consul called Henry Carr who is in the process of mounting a production of Wilde’s The Importance of Being Earnest.

The production was co-directed by Brigid Larmour, now artistic director of the Watford Palace Theatre, and Annabelle Arden, who directs opera around the world. At the time they were very smart first-years who had hit the ground running. The others in the cast will forgive me, I hope, if I fail to recount their own admirable contributions to the success of the evening. Although it was a truly excellent production in and of itself, what stood out for me above all else was the performance of just one of the actresses. The girl who played Gwendolen stood out like a good deed in a naughty world.

She seemed, like Athene, to have arrived in the world fully armed. Her voice, her movement, her clarity, ease, poise, wit … well, you had to be there. One of the best things any performer on stage can do, whether stand-up comic, torch singer, ballet dancer, character actor or tragedian, is to relax an audience. To let them know that everything is going to be all right and that they can lean back in their seats happy in the knowledge that the evening won’t be a disaster. Of course, another of the best things a performer can do is provoke a feeling of excitement, danger, unpredictability and instability. To let the audience know that the evening might fail at any moment and that they need to lean forward in their seats and watch intently. If you can manage both at once then you are really something. This girl was really something. Medium height with a perfect English complexion, she was gravely beautiful, extraordinarily funny and commandingly assured beyond her years. Her name, the programme told me, was Emma Thompson. In the interval I heard someone say that she was the daughter of Eric Thompson, the voice of The Magic Roundabout.



Emma.

Fast forward to March 1992. For her performance as Margaret Schlegel in Howards End Emma has won the Academy Award for Best Actress. Journalists are ringing round all her old friends to find out what they think of this. Now, it is a kind of unwritten rule that when the press ask you to speak about someone else you never say a word unless that person has cleared it with you beforehand. If one wants to talk about oneself to a journalist that is fine, but it really isn’t on to blather about a third party without their permission. One persistent journalist, having been more or less rebuffed by all of Emma’s old friends, somehow gets hold of Kim Harris’s number.

‘Hello?’

‘Hi, I’m from the Post. I understand you’re an old university friend of Emma Thompson’s?’

‘Ye-e-es …’

‘I wonder if you’ve anything to say about her Oscar? Are you surprised? Do you think she deserves it?’

‘I have to come right out and tell you,’ says Kim, ‘that I feel betrayed, let down and most disappointed by Emma Thompson.’

The journalist almost drops his phone. Kim can hear the sound of a pencil being sucked and then, he later swears, of drool hitting the carpet.

‘Betrayed? Really? Yes? Go on.’

‘Anyone who ever saw Emma Thompson at university,’ says Kim, ‘would have laid substantial money on her getting an Oscar before she was thirty. She is now just over thirty. It’s a crushing disappointment.’

Not as crushing a disappointment as that felt by the journalist who for one second thought he had a story. Kim, as he so often does, put it perfectly. That really was all there was to say. Plenty of other students were talented, some prodigiously so, and one might guess that with a fair following wind, the right opportunities and a measure of guidance and growth, they would have decent, or even brilliant, careers. With Emma you just saw her once and you knew. Stardom. Oscar. Damehood. That last is up to her of course but you can guarantee it will be offered.

Men like their actresses, if they are superb, to be air-headed, ditzy and charmingly foolish. Emma is certainly capable of … refreshingly different approaches to logical thought … but air-headed, ditzy or foolish she is not: she is one of the most clear-minded and intelligent people I have met. The fact that her second Oscar, two years after the first, was awarded for a screenplay, tells you all you need to know about her ability to concentrate, think and work. If it is tempting to be cross with people for having so many gifts lavished on them at birth, she has an abundance of kindness, openness and sweetness of nature that makes envy or resentment difficult. I am aware that we have entered the treacly territory of ‘darling she’s lovely and gorgeous’ here, but that is the risk a book like this was always going to run. I did warn you. For those of you who would rather take away some other view of the woman, I can tell you definitively that she is a talentless mad bitch sow who wanders the streets of north London in nothing but a pair of ill-matched wellington boots. She only gets parts in films because she sleeps with the producers’ animals. Plus she smells. She never wrote a screenplay in her life. She chains up a writer she drugged at a party twenty years ago, and he is responsible for everything published under her name. Her so-called liberal humanitarian principles are as false as her breasts: she is a member of the Gestapo and regrets the passing of Apartheid. That’s Emma Thompson for you: the darling of fools and the fool of darlings.

Despite or because of this we got to know each other. She was at the all-women’s college Newnham, where, like me, she read English. She was funny. Very funny. Also extreme with her fashion sense. The day came when she decided to shave her head: I blame the influence of Annie Lennox. Emma and I were both in the same seminar group at the English faculty and one morning, after a stimulating discussion of A Winter’s Tale, we walked together down Sidgwick Avenue towards the centre of town. She pulled off her woolly hat so that I could feel the texture of her bare pate. In those days it was unlikely that anyone would have seen a woman as bald as an egg. A boy riding past on a bicycle turned to stare and, his panic-stricken eyes never leaving Emma’s shining scalp, rode straight into a tree. I never thought such things took place outside silent movies, but it happened and it made me happy.



Emma Thompson’s hair is starting to grow back.

The first term came and went without my daring once to attend an audition. I had seen that there could be actors, or one at least, as astonishing as Emma, but there had been plenty getting parts that I felt I could have played better, or at least no worse. Nonetheless I held back.

For the most part my life in college and in the wider university followed a blandly traditional course. I joined the Cambridge Union, which is nothing to do with students’ unions, but a debating society with its own chamber, a kind of miniature House of Commons, all wood and leather and stained glass, complete with a gallery and doors marked ‘Aye’ and ‘No’ through which you file to vote after the ‘Speaker’ has put the motion to the ‘House’. All a little pompous really, but ancient and traditional. Many in Margaret Thatcher’s cabinet had been Cambridge Union hacks in the early sixties: Norman Fowler, Cecil Parkinson, John Selwyn Gummer, Ken Clarke, Norman Lamont, Geoffrey Howe … that bunch. I was not politically inclined enough to want to speak or attempt to work my way into the inner circle of the Union, nor was I interested in asking questions from the floor of the house or contributing to debates in any other way. I watched a few – Bernard Levin, Lord Lever, Enoch Powell and a handful of others came to argue about the great issues of the day, whatever they were back then. War, terrorism, poverty, injustice, as I recall … problems that have now all been solved but which at the time seemed most pressing. There was also a ‘comedy’ debate once a term, usually with a fanciful motion like ‘This House Believes in Trousers’ or ‘This House Would Rather Be a Sparrow Than a Snail’. I went to one where the handlebar-mustachioed comedian Jimmy Edwards, drunk as a skunk, played the tuba, told excellent jokes and afterwards – so I was told – fondled the thighs of all the comely young men at the dinner. I have since been invited many times to debate at Cambridge, Oxford and other universities and shiningly comely and shudderingly handsome have been some of the young men who have hosted the evenings. I never quite got the hang of the getting drunk and fondling the thigh business though. Whether that makes me a gallant and proper gentleman, a cowardly wuss or an unadventurous prude I cannot quite make out. Thighs appear to be safe around me. Perhaps this will change as I enter the autumn of my life and I cease to care so much about how I am judged.

Kim had immediately joined the University Chess Club and was playing for them in matches against other universities. Nobody doubted he would get his Blue, or rather Half Blue. You are perhaps aware that in Oxford and Cambridge there are such things as sporting ‘Blues’. You can represent Cambridge, whose colour is light blue, on the hockey field, for example, for just about every game of the season and be far and away the best player on the pitch for all of them, but if you miss the Varsity game, the one match against the dark blues, Oxford, you will not be awarded your Blue. A Blue, for either side, means you played against The Enemy. The Boat Race and Varsity matches in rugby and cricket are the most celebrated encounters, but there are Blues contests between Oxford and Cambridge in every imaginable sport, game and competitive activity from judo to table-tennis, from bridge to boxing, from golf to wine-tasting. The minor pursuits result in participants being awarded a ‘Half Blue’, and that is what Kim duly won when he represented Cambridge against Oxford in the Varsity chess match, at the RAC in Pall Mall, sponsored by Lloyds Bank. He played in that match for every one of his three years, winning the prize for best game in 1981.



Kim in Half Blue scarf.

Kim and I were the closest of friends but we were not yet lovers. He pined for a second-year called Robin, and I pined for no one in particular. Love had mauled me too violently in my teenage years, perhaps. I had fallen in love at school so completely, intensely and soul-rippingly that I had made some sort of unconscious pact with myself, I think, that I would neither betray the purity of that rapturous perfection (I know, I know, but that is how I felt) nor would I ever again open myself up for such pain and torment (exquisite as they were). There were plenty of attractive young men in the colleges and about the town, and a more than statistically usual ratio gave the impression of being as gay as gay can gaily be. I remember one or two drunken evenings in my own or another’s bed, with attendant fumbling, frotting, fondling and farcically floppy failure as well as more infrequent feats of fizzing fanfare and triumphant fleshly fulfilment, but love stayed away, and, sensualist as I am in many regards, I seemed to miss neither the rewards nor the punishments of carnality.


A week or so towards the end of the first term I was approached and asked if I would sit on the May Ball Committee. Most universities hold a summer party to celebrate the end of exams and the coming long vacation. Oxford has what they call Commem Balls, Cambridge has May Balls.

‘We get one fresher on the committee every year,’ the President of the committee said to me, ‘so that by the time the May Ball comes around in your last year, you’ll know what it’s all about.’

I never dared ask why they had selected me out of all the freshers to be the one to sit on the committee, but I took it as a great compliment. Perhaps they thought I exhibited style, savoir faire, diablerie, dash and a graceful party manner. Or perhaps they believed that I was the kind of biddable sucker who would be prepared to put in the hours.

‘In any case,’ I was told, ‘it means you will be President of the May Ball committee in your third year, which will look really good on the CV. Excellent for getting a job in the City.’

Already we were moving towards a time when getting a job in the City, rather than being looked at as an embarrassing gateway to clerkly drudgery and dull worthiness, was beginning to be thought of as a glamorous, sexy and desirable destiny for the elite of the world.

The members of the May Ball Committee were, as you might expect, public-school men. Many of them were also members of the Cherubs, Queens’ College’s exclusive dining and drinking club. I know I ought to have looked down on institutions like May Balls and dining clubs with amused scorn, lofty disdain and impatient wrath, but the moment I heard of the Cherubs’ existence I resolved that I would be elected. I once heard Alan Bennett say of snobbery that it was ‘a very amiable vice’, which I found surprising. ‘That is to say,’ he went on, ‘the kind of snobbery that looks up with admiration is amiable. Daft, but amiable. The kind that looks down with contempt is not amiable. Not amiable at all.’ I cannot deny that I am susceptible to a tinge of the amiable kind. I believe I have never looked down on anyone because they are ‘low born’ (whatever that might mean) but I cannot deny that I have been glamourized by those who are ‘high born’ (whatever that might mean). It is a preposterous weakness and I could easily pretend that I am immune to it, but the fact is that I am not, so I may as well fess up. I suppose it is, once more, all part of the feeling I have always had of being an outsider, always needing the proof of belonging that those who truly belong never need. Or something like that.


The Cambridge term is only eight weeks long. They call it Full Term, and you are expected to be in residence for all of it – in theory the permission of a Dean or Senior Tutor is needed for an ‘exeat’ if you want to biff off; you can make up your time away during the two weeks that bracket either end of Full Term. I kept Full Term so that I could go straight up to Cundall and teach there for the three weeks they had left of their, much longer, school term. After Christmas with my family in Norfolk it was back to Cundall for a week and then to Cambridge for the Lent term.

The very fact of this being my second term seemed to release something in me, for I went to three auditions in the first week. I got the parts I wanted for all of them. I played Jeremiah Sant, an insane Ian Paisley-style Ulsterman, in Peter Luke’s dramatization of the Corvo novel Hadrian the Seventh, the distraught Jewish tailor who sees a ghost in Wolf Mankowitz’s The Bespoke Overcoat and someone or other in the Trinity Hall lunchtime production of a play about Scottish nationalism. This set the pattern for a term which saw me running from rehearsals to auditions to theatres and back to auditions and rehearsals and theatres again. Lunchtime, evening and late night were the three usual slots for performance: if someone had suggested a morning production I would have put myself up for that too. I think I was in twelve plays in that eight-week term. I managed one essay on Edmund Spenser and went to no lectures or seminars. Supervisions, the Cambridge word for tutorials, were the only more or less compulsory academic intrusion on my new theatrical life. You would go alone, or occasionally with one other, to a don’s rooms, read out the essay you had written, talk about it and then discuss some other writer, literary movement or phenomenon and leave promising an essay on that subject for the next week. I became adept at excuses:

‘I’m really sorry, Dr Holland, but I’m still trying to engage with the eschatology of Paradise Lost. I think I’ll take another week to come to terms with it.’ It is shameful and lowering to confess how I would mine dictionaries of literary and philosophical terms for words like eschatology, syncresis and syntagmatic.

‘Fine, fine. Take your time.’

Dr Holland wouldn’t be fooled for a second. Being used to undergraduates, he would be familiar with their tiresome long-word displays (you will already have winced at plenty of them in this book I dare say: the felid remains incapable of permuting his nevi) and he had probably been in the audience of at least two of the plays I had acted in that week and would know perfectly well that I was spending every hour on drama and none on academic work. Cambridge was very relaxed about that kind of thing. As long as they didn’t think you were going to fail your degree there was no danger of them playing the heavy. The chances of failing a degree were fabulously remote. It was perhaps a part of the institution’s arrogance that it believed anyone it selected for entrance was necessarily incapable of failure. For the rest the faculty and college very sensibly left it up to the individual. If you wanted to work hard for a first-class degree any amount of help was given; if you preferred to spend your time pulling an oar through the water or striding about in tights roaring pentameters, why then that was fine too. A relaxed atmosphere of trust pervaded the university.

That Lent term passed in a blizzard of acting. By the end of it I was an insider in the small world of Cambridge drama. The little microcosm reflected the esoteric coteries, cliques and factions (I only put the word ‘esoteric’ in front of ‘coteries’ because it is an anagram of it and that pleases me) of the wider world without. The bar of the ADC theatre was a-hum with talk of Artaud and Anouilh, Stanislavsky and Stein, Brecht and Blin. Many a strong-stomached aspiring sportsman, scientist or politico would have been unable to overhear our talk without vomiting. We probably used the word ‘darling’ for each other. I certainly did. If not honeybottom, loveangel or nippleface. Sickening I know, but there you are. The derogatory epithet ‘lovie’ had yet to be ascribed to the theatrical profession, but that’s what – avant la lettre – we were, lovies all. History and precedent might be said to have encouraged us: Peter Hall, John Barton, Richard Eyre, Trevor Nunn, Nick Hytner, James Mason, Michael Redgrave, Derek Jacobi, Ian McKellen … the list of theatrical giants who had leaned up against the same bar and dreamed the same dreams was inspiringly great.

So how did I get to that position so fast? Was I really so talented? Or was everyone else really so talentless? I wish I knew. I can remember a great many images, occasions and solid experiences, but the emotional memory behind them is blurred and unresolved. Was I ambitious? Yes, I think in some secret way I was ambitious. Always far too proud to let it show, but hungry for Cambridge’s silly microcosmic equivalent of stardom. I suppose when the captain of the college rugger team sees some fresher take to the field and get his first opportunity to make a run and handle the ball he knows straight away that this person can, or cannot, play rugby. For all my shortcomings as an actor (physical awkwardness, reliance on speech, tendency to choose ironic ruefulness over raw emotion) I suppose at auditions I showed that I at least had that thing in me that allowed an audience in. Through the occlusions of the past I can make out a tall, thin, dignified, rumbly toned student who could look either seventeen or thirty-seven. He knows how to stand still and look another actor in the eye. He knows how to deliver a line at least in such a way as to convey its meaning and, if necessary, its majesty. He can, as they say, ‘pull focus’ on to and off his own self. I am not so sure about his ability to inhabit a different personality, to live through the arc of his character’s journey on stage and all that mother jazz, but he is at least unlikely to be a blush-making embarrassment.

The moment I walked on stage for the first time I felt so absolutely and entirely at home that it was hard for me to remember that I had had almost no experience at all. I loved every single thing about acting. I loved the mockable sides of it, the instant camaraderie and deep affection one felt for everyone else involved, I loved the long conversations about motive, I loved read-throughs and rehearsals and tech runs, I loved trying on costumes and experimenting with make-up. I loved the tingle of nerves as I waited in the wings, I loved the almost mystical hyperaesthetic way in which one was aware of each microsecond on stage, of how one could detect precisely where an audience’s focus was at any one moment, I loved the thrill of knowing that I was carrying hundreds of people with me, that they were surfing on the ebb and flow of my voice.

Taking such pleasure in being on stage really isn’t about relishing love, attention and admiration. It is not about enjoying the power you (think you) have over an audience. It is simply a question of fulfilment. You feel perfectly alive and magnificently perfected by the knowledge that you are doing what you were put on earth to do.

Not so very long ago I accompanied some northern white rhinos on a journey to Kenya. They were being translocated from the zoo in the Czech Republic that was all they had ever known. It was immeasurably moving to watch these animals raise their top-heavy heads and take in the huge open skies of the savannah and the smells and sounds of a habitat to which their genes had taken millions of years to adapt them. The quick, unbelieving grunts, the waving of their horns from side to side and the twitching in their great hides told you that somewhere inside they knew that they were where they were supposed to be. I will not claim that the stage is my savannah, but I did feel something of the surge of relief and joy at finally having come home that the rhinos seemed to express as they nosed the air of Africa for the first time.

It is only a pity that the professional grown-up theatre won’t allow you the same levels of fun and fulfilment. After three performances, or five at the most, student productions are over, and you move on to something else. Which I did. And again and again.


The Easter term is when Cambridge springs to life and becomes one of the most marvellous places on earth to be. As St John’s College alumnus William Wordsworth put it: ‘Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, But to be young was very heaven!’ He was writing less about May Week and more about the French Revolution, but the thought holds better for the first, and I bet that in truth he was thinking more about garden parties than guillotines.

The Head of the River competition is held on the Cam twice a year, each college’s boat jostling to bump the one ahead and move a place up in the order. The river isn’t wide enough to allow a side-by-side regatta which is why these peculiar Lent and May Week Bumps evolved. Lining the river bank and cheering on my college is probably the most ‘normal’ Cambridgey thing I did in my three years.

Further upriver, the beauty of the Backs in late spring and early summer is enough to make the sternest puritan moan and shiver with delight. Sunlight on the stone of the bridges, willows leaning down to weep and kiss the water: young boys and girls, or boys and boys, or girls and girls, punting up to Grantchester Meadows, bottles of white wine tied with string trailing through the wake to cool, ‘No kissing in the punt’ – careful how you say that, hoho. Revising finalists under chestnut trees, books and notes spread out on the grass as they smoke, drink, chatter, flirt, kiss and read. Garden parties on every lawn in every college for the two weeks in June that are perversely designated May Week. Dining clubs and societies, dons, clubs and rich individuals serving punch and Pimm’s, beer and sangria, cocktails and champagne. Blazers and flannels, self-conscious little snobberies and affectations, flushed youth, pampered youth, privileged youth, happy youth. Don’t be too hard on them. Suppress the thought that they are all ghastly tosspots who don’t know they’re born, insufferable poseurs in need of a kick and a slap. Have some pity and understanding. They will get that kick and that slap soon enough. After all, look at them now. They are all in their fifties. Some of them on their third, fourth or fifth marriage. Their children despise them. They are alcoholics or recovering alcoholics. Drug addicts or recovering drug addicts. Their wrinkled, grey, bald, furrowed and fallen faces look back every morning from the mirror, those folds of dying flesh bearing not a trace of the high, joyful and elastic smiles that once lit them. Their lives have been a ruin and a waste. All that bright promise never quite matured into anything that can be looked back on with pride or pleasure. They took that job in the City, that job with the merchant bank, stockbroker, law firm, accountancy firm, chemical company, drama company, publishing company, any company. The light and energy, the passion, fun and faith were soon snuffed out one by one. In the grind of the demanding world their foolish hopeful dreams evaporated like mist in the cruel glare of the morning sun. Sometimes the dreams return to them at night and they are so ashamed, angry and disappointed that they want to kill themselves. Once they laughed and seduced or laughed and were seduced, on ancient lawns, under ancient stones and now they hate the young and their music, they snort with contempt at everything strange and new and they have to catch their breath at the top of the stairs.

Goodness, Stephen, who rattled your cage? Not everyone’s life ends in misery, loneliness and failure.

Of course, I know that. You’re right. But many do. The entropy and decay of age is dreadfully apparent when set next to the lyrical dream of a Cambridge May Week, hackneyed, outdated, unjust and absurd as such an idyll may be. It is that scene that classical painters used to love: the golden lads and lasses sporting in Elysium, throwing garlands, drinking and embracing, all unaware of the tomb on which a skull rests and never noticing its carved inscription: ‘Et in arcadia ego.’ Why should they notice it? Its shadow will be on them soon enough and they in turn will be wagging fingers at their children and saying, ‘I too once lived in arcadia, you know …’ and their children will not listen either.

Many Cantabrigians might read the foregoing and recognize not a line of it. Plenty of students eschewed with contempt anything close to a blazer or a glass of Pimm’s, most never lined the river on a May Bumps afternoon, never sipped planter’s punch in the Master’s Garden, never cunted up the Pam to Grantchester, nor once had to be helped to an ambulance and a stomach pump on Suicide Sunday. There were a lot of Cambridges, I am just trying to remember mine, nauseating as it may be.


As well as all these parties there were plays. Queens’ College’s drama club was called BATS, supposedly because of the flittermice that wheeled and squeaked in the sky above the Cloister Court during its end-of-term outdoor presentation, one of the most popular and distinctive regular features of May Week. This year’s production was to be The Tempest, and the director, a Queens’ second-year called Ian Softley, cast me as Alonso, King of Naples. Being tall and boomy I was nearly always given the role of a king or elderly authority figure. The young lovers, glamorous girls and handsome princes were played by students who looked their age. I never looked mine, but given that almost everyone was between eighteen and twenty-two, looking older was a distinct advantage so far as casting went.

Ian Softley now directs motion pictures – The Wings of the Dove, Backbeat, Hackers, Inkheart and so on – but then he was a student with black curly hair and an appealing way of wearing white trousers. The cast included Rob Wyke, a graduate who was to become a close friend and, playing Prospero, a most extraordinary actor and even more extraordinary man, Richard MacKenney. In the middle of writing his PhD thesis, ‘Trade guilds and devotional confraternities in the state and society of Venice to 1620’, he could already speak not only fluent Italian, but fluent Venetian, which is quite another thing. While waiting for the cast to turn up (he was always exactly punctual himself, as was I) he would pace up and down at high speed, humming every note of the overture to Mozart’s Don Giovanni. If we were still not quorate by the time that had been got through he would move on to Leporello’s opening aria and keep at it until everyone was present, singing all the parts perfectly from memory. On one occasion Ariel was half an hour late owing to some confusion about time and venue (there was no way to text or call in those days), and when he at last arrived, red and gasping, Richard broke off from his singing and turned on him furiously.

‘What time do you call this, then? The Commendatore’s dead and Ottavio is swearing on his blood to be revenged.’

Richard was a magnificent actor, his King Lear was astonishing in one so young (a receding brow and faux-grumpy manner made him appear fifty although he can’t have been much older than twenty-three or four) but he hid his artistry under an obsession with pace and volume. ‘All you’ve got to do,’ he said, ‘is get down the front of the stage and have a good old shout.’ He once gave the entire cast a bollocking for adding five minutes to the running time. ‘Unforfuckinggivable! Every extra second is so much piss on Shakespeare’s grave.’

I watched one afternoon as Ian Softley squatted in front of Barry Taylor, who was playing Caliban. ‘Do you know the work of the punk poet John Cooper Clarke?’ he whispered, sorrowful brown eyes gazing deeply into Barry’s.

‘Er, yes …’

‘I think, don’t you, that we can afford something of that street anger in Caliban. Some of that rage?’

‘Er …’

‘Oh forget about that,’ said Richard, who had been pacing up and down, hands clasped firmly behind his back. ‘Just get down the front of the stage and have a good old squeak and a gibber.’ I don’t suppose, with all due respect to Ian and John Cooper Clarke, that there has ever been better advice given to any actor playing Caliban in the 400 years since The Tempest’s creation.

One morning I noticed a poster in the street for an exhibition at the Fitzwilliam Museum. They were going to bring out some of the Blake drawings, paintings, prints and letters that usually, due to their marked sensitivity to light, were kept hidden away in dark drawers. I mentioned this to Richard and asked if he was going.

‘William Blake?’ said Richard. ‘Couldn’t draw, couldn’t colour in.’

MacKenney is now a history professor at Edinburgh University. I hope they value him properly.

Dave Huggins stopped me in Walnut Tree Court one afternoon.

‘My mum’s coming to see your play tonight.’

‘Is she?’ I was surprised. Dave wasn’t in the drama world, and it seemed odd for a parent to come to a production that her child wasn’t in.

‘Yeah. She’s an actress.’

I consulted my memory to see if it could offer any data on an actress called Huggins. It had no suggestions. ‘Er … well. That’s nice.’

‘Yeah. So’s my dad.’

‘Might I know them?’

‘Dunno. They both use acting names. She’s called Anna Massey and he calls himself Jeremy Brett.’

‘B-but … good God!’

Anna Massey, coming to see me in a play? Well not expressly to see me, but coming to a play that I was in.

‘Your father won’t be there as well, will he?’

‘No, they’re divorced. He’s gay.’

‘Is he? Is he? I didn’t … well, well. Goodness. Blimey. My word.’

I tottered off, numb with excitement.

We had our four or five performances under the fluttering bats; Ariel sprinted about, Caliban squeaked and gibbered, I boomed, Prospero got down the front and had a good old shout, Anna Massey graciously applauded.

In the meantime I had been helping prepare for the May Ball.


It so happens that the Patron or Visitor of Queens’ College is, appropriately enough given the foundation’s name, whoever might happen to be Queen at the time: a position she holds until her death. From the 1930s to the 1950s the queen was, of course, Elizabeth, wife of George VI. After George died, now styled the Queen Mother, she remained in place. There’s a point to all this.

We are at a meeting of the May Ball Committee. Much of the time is taken up with the particular details that you might expect – how to run the roulette table without falling foul of the gaming acts, who will be in charge of escorting the Boomtown Rats to the tent set aside as their changing room, whether or not there will be enough ice in the champagne bar, the usual kind of administrative trivia. The President turns to me.

‘Got your Magdelene and Trinity invitations yet?’

‘Yup, and Clare.’

One of the perks of being on a May Ball committee was that you received free invitations to other May Balls. Aside from our own, I was going to the ball at Clare, one of the prettiest of the colleges, where my cousin Penny was also a fresher, and to the two grandest of all, Trinity and Magdalene. So grand were they that gossip columnists and photographers from the Tatler and Harper’s & Queen attended. You could get away with a dinner jacket at Clare and Queens’, but Trinity and Magdalene insisted on white tie and tails. The hire companies did a roaring trade. Only King’s, a mixed college and proud of its radical and progressive ethos, refused to hold a May Ball. Their summer party was called instead, with dour literalism, the King’s June Event.

‘Good,’ the President of the Committee says to me. ‘Oh. One other little thing. Dr Walker sent me a note saying that if the Queen Mother dies the college has to go into mourning for a week, during which no entertainments or celebrations of any kind can be held, certainly not a May Ball. Perhaps you might look into insurance to cover that?’

‘Insurance?’ I try to sound casual and unconcerned, as if arranging insurance policies is something I have been doing since I was an infant. ‘Ah … right. Yes. Sure. Of course.’

The meeting ends, and I slip into the public phone box in the corner of Friar’s Court and start ringing around insurance companies.

‘Sun Life, can I help you?’

‘Ah, yes. I’m calling up about getting a policy …’

‘Life, car, commercial or property?’

‘Well, none of those really.’

‘Marine, travel or medical?’

‘Well, again. None. It’s to insure against having to cancel an event.’

‘Abandonment?’

‘Er … that’s the term is it, abandonment? Well, yes, abandonment then …’

‘Hold please, caller …’

I wait until a tired voice comes on the line.

‘Special services, how can I help?’

‘I’m ringing about getting a policy to insure an event … I think you call it abandonment?’

‘Oh yes? What sort of event?

‘Well it’s a party.’

‘An outdoors event, is it?’

‘Well, it’s a ball. Mostly on lawns in tents, but some parts are inside.’

‘I see … and you want rain cover. Partial or complete abandonment?’

‘No, not rain cover so much as reign cover.’

‘Excuse me?’

‘Sorry, no. I mean … well, it’s to insure against the Queen Mother dying.’

The sound of a receiver being banged on the desk followed by a blowing down the earpiece. ‘Something wrong with the line. Sounded like … never mind. Could you repeat that please?’

Here in the twenty-first century there are probably only two insurance companies left in the world, called Axxentander or something equally foul, but in 1979 there were dozens. I tried the Royal, Swan, Prudential, Pearl, Norwich Union – all those I had heard of and a dozen that I hadn’t. In each case, once I had succeeded in getting the agent to understand what was required, I was asked to call back. I imagine that they needed to consult higher up the chain of command. It might be said that they had abandonment issues.

This kind of insurance is, of course, nothing more nor less than gambling. You bet your stake (which insurance companies call a premium) and should your horse win (house catch fire, car get stolen, royal family member die) you collect your winnings. The relationship between the premium and the amount collected is determined by balancing the value of the insured thing (the indemnity) against the odds and statistical probability of its being threatened. Bookies use the form and stud books together with the market flow of betting to determine their prices; insurance companies use a similar mixture of market trends and their own history and precedent books, which they call actuarial tables. I can understand that. Had I wanted an abandonment policy against snow and ice, they would have looked at the value of the May Ball and seen that they would have to shell out £40,000 if it was cancelled. They would also see that blizzards in early June are incredibly rare, even in Cambridge, so they would probably charge a fraction of a fraction of 1 per cent of the indemnity: £20 would be ungenerous, but then only an idiot would bother to insure against so remote a contingency in the first place. With a rain policy the insurers might decide, after consulting forecasters and local records, that there was, say, a fifty-fifty chance of precipitation in which case the premium would be a whopping £20,000. But then, what kind of an idiot would arrange a summer party in England which was so weather dependent that it would have to be abandoned if the heavens opened? Abandonment policies are not very common, that is the point, but there are nonetheless fairly obvious mechanisms in place for resolving the issue of price when it comes to natural disasters like weather, fire and earthquake. The death of the monarch’s mother, on the other hand … how could an actuary be expected to calculate the odds of that? She was seventy-nine years old.

I decided that I would give the companies three hours before calling back for a quote.

Did the insurance clerks go into her family history and check out the longevity of the entire Bowes-Lyon clan? Did they call up Clarence House and inquire into the Queen Mother’s health, diet and exercise regime? Did they take into account her reputed fondness for gin and Dubonnet? I can only imagine the discussions they must have had in their offices.

In the case of each firm, when I called back, the actuaries appeared to be very gloomy about the old girl’s hopes of making it through the next few months: 20, 25, 23 per cent chances of her surviving until the middle of June were implied by the gigantic premiums they proposed. The cheapest offer, 20 per cent of the indemnity, was way beyond our reach. I had been given a budget of £50.

‘I am afraid,’ I tell the President of the Committee after returning from the last of the calls, ‘that we are simply going to have to pray for Her Majesty’s continued good health. If she does die I will undertake to keep the news from the Fellows if I have to steal every newspaper and radio in the college and lock them all in a cellar to do so.’

‘I may hold you to that,’ the President said, a worried look furrowing his youthful brow.

I do not suppose that a queen’s life has been prayed for more assiduously since the days of Boudicca. Sadly, the Queen Mother did die, though happily for us, not for another twenty-three years. When she finally left the world in 2002, she was thoughtful enough to do so in March, meaning that the college’s period of mourning would be well over by May Week. It was just such examples of kindness and consideration that endeared her to so many during a long, varied and vigorous life. Some time in the 1990s, sitting next to her at a dinner, I considered thanking her on behalf of the college for so thoughtfully delaying her death, but shyness and good sense got the better of me.


Another feature of the Cambridge Easter term (for so they call the third term of the academic year) is the Footlights May Week Revue. The Footlights Club is one of the university’s best-known institutions, having sent generations of comic writers and performers into the world over the course of its 130-year history. Its May Week show at the Arts Theatre was an annual ritual. If you were cool it was an event to disdain. ‘Apparently the Footlights are crap this year,’ you would say to your companion as you wrinkled your nose at a poster for the event. There has never been a year in which this has not been said. The same phrase would have been heard when Jonathan Miller was running the Footlights, or Peter Cook and David Frost, through Cleese, Chapman and Idle and past Douglas Adams, Clive Anderson and Griff Rhys Jones, Dave Baddiel and Rob Newman, David Mitchell and Robert Webb all the way up to the current year. If you were normal, such cynicism did not occur to you, and the May Week Revue was another fun fixture on the Cambridge calendar. I was neither cool nor normal, but simply too busy with The Tempest and other things to be able to attend.

I heard that someone was putting together a production of Oedipus Rex for Edinburgh and decided that I might as well go and audition. I boomed and strutted and gestured and declaimed in front of the director, Peter Rumney, and left thinking that perhaps I had rather overdone it. The next day I found in my pigeonhole a note from Peter asking me to play Oedipus. I was bound for the Festival Fringe, and my excitement was almost impossible to contain. For the rest of the term I bounced and buzzed about Cambridge like a bee in a bottle.

At some point I believe I must have sat some exams. Prelims, I think they were called. I remember precisely nothing about them. Not where they took place, nor what kinds of questions we were given to answer. I suppose I must have passed them, for no trouble arose and no stern interviews were sought. My Cambridge proceeded pleasantly enough without the intrusion of academic study: a university is not, thank heavens, a place for vocational instruction, it has nothing to do with training for a working life and career, it is a place for education, something quite different. A real education takes place, not in the lecture hall or library, but in the rooms of friends, with earnest frolic and happy disputation. Wine can be a wiser teacher than ink, and banter is often better than books. That was my theory at least, and I was living by it. Such serene and lofty views of education as against vocational training were beginning to madden the new political leadership. Thatcher was an industrial chemist and a lawyer, after all, both disciplines that need Gradgrindery and training and require no education whatsoever – as she demonstrated. Our kind of loose learning, as they would regard it, this cleaving to the elitist tradition of the Liberal Arts, this arrogant Athenian self-indulgence was an enemy, a noxious weed that required summary eradication. Its days were numbered.

The 1979 Queens’ May Ball took place. I donned the tailcoat that I had rented for the week, all ready to … well, to have myself a ball. We happy, flushed, proud and excited members of the committee met for champagne half an hour before the kick-off. Ten minutes later I was in an ambulance on my way to Addenbrooke’s Hospital, an oxygen mask over my face, fighting for every breath. Bloody asthma. It would be another two years before I fully understood what had brought it on. I often succumbed to attacks at weddings, fêtes, Hunt Balls or events of that kind. On such occasions there were usually flowers and summer pollen about, so it had never occurred to me that the cause of my face going blue and my lungs closing for business was actually champagne. A ridiculous allergy, but one doesn’t choose them.

At Addenbrooke’s an injection of adrenaline had such an immediately restorative effect that I was out of the hospital, in a cab and on the way back to Queens’ by ten, two fresh inhalers for emergencies spoiling the sweep and cut of my dress trousers. I was determined not to miss another minute.

May Balls traditionally end with a breakfast, and many party-goers like to welcome the dawn on the Cam. Even at that young age I was a sentimental and slushy fool, maudlin (pronounced Magdalene) to a dreadful fault. I am none the less so now and shall never find the sight of young men in dégagé evening wear punting their loved ones along the river on a summer’s morning anything other than agonizingly romantic, piercingly lovely and heart-stoppingly adorable.





Caledonia 1

After the term ended, I took myself off as usual to North Yorkshire to teach a little Latin, umpire Cundall Manor’s Second Eleven, prepare the games fields for Sports Day and, in such spare time as I had, learn the role of Oedipus as well as lines for my various parts in a production of Charles Marowitz’s Artaud at Rodez which the Cambridge Mummers were presenting and in which I had also, perhaps foolishly, agreed to appear. Foolishly because, each day for a fortnight, the moment the curtain went down on Artaud I was going to have to hare off to the venue where Oedipus would be due to start half an hour later. Old Edinburgh hands said I would be cutting it fine, especially if I had complicated costume to doff and don or heavy make-up to remove and apply, but cutting it fine was one of the things I liked to do.

For three weeks in late summer Edinburgh is the world centre of student drama. I was to perform at the Fringe every year for the next five years at least. Most who go cannot fail to fall instantly in love with the city as much as with the event. Within a couple of days the muscles on your shins ache from the unaccustomed steep ascents and descents of the town, the numberless stone steps and narrow wynds surprise your muscles – if you were used to the easy, level streets of East Anglian towns and a sedentary life it did more than surprise them, it shocked and outraged them. The ancient towering grimness of Edinburgh’s old tenements with their stone staircases and minatory blank gabling made me feel that at any moment Burke and Hare, Deacon Brodie or Mr Hyde were about to rise snarling from the steps of the Grassmarket. What did arise were, of course, nothing more terrifying than young drunks bearing polystyrene trays of Spudulike with cheese. In those days baked potato take-aways provided the cheapest form of filling nutrition a student could require. Scotland really was another country. The diet was different: aside from Spudulike the chicken carry-out shops offered the delicate specialité du pays – deep-fried Mars Bars, Wagon Wheels and Curly Wurlys. Scottish banknotes were different, the language, the weather, the light, even the Kensitas cigarettes were unfamiliar. A pint of heavy was the preferred drink, heavy being bitter or at least a gassy something that gestured towards the idea of it.

Everywhere about the city, on every wall, window, lamp-post or doorway, were posters for plays, comedies and idiosyncratic entertainments that combined everything from circus, music hall, surrealist balloon manipulation and ballet to street percussion, Maoist limbo-dancing, gender-bending operetta and chainsaw juggling. Members of the casts of these shows would dress up and run down the streets showering the good-naturedly reluctant passers-by with leaflets and complimentary tickets. On the opening day a parade of floats moved slowly east along Princes Street. There was somewhere in the city, or so we were told, a proper and official Festival being held: professional theatre companies and international orchestras performed plays and concerts for grown-ups in smart concert halls and theatres, but we saw or knew nothing of these, we were the Fringe, a vast fungus-like organism that spread its filaments throughout the fabric of Edinburgh, into the dossiest accommodations, weirdest sheds, huts, warehouses and wharves, and into every church hall and functional space large enough to house a punk magician and a few chairs.

Half-way along the Royal Mile, which runs down from Edinburgh Castle to Holyrood Palace, stood the Fringe Office, where festival-goers queued up for tickets. There were two shows I knew that I simply had to see. One was the Footlights Revue which due to The Tempest I had missed in Cambridge, and the other was a one-man comedy performance which was being put on at the Wireworks, a converted factory just behind the Fringe Office. I had been told so many times that this performer, an Oxford graduate called Rowan Atkinson, was not to be missed that I felt justified in lining up to plank down some cash on tickets for me and the Oedipus cast.

There was bad news when I got to the front of the queue.

‘Ooh, that one’s sold out, my darling.’

‘Oh, really?’

‘’Fraid so … what else do you – hang on.’

She picked up the phone and as she listened to the other end a smile lit up her face and she flashed me a happy look. She was a very pretty young Scot and wonderfully cheerful given her hard, non-computerized workload. I can still picture her face exactly.

‘Well, well. That was the Rowan Atkinson people just now to say that due to popular demand they are doing an extra late-night performance on Saturday night. Can you make it?’

I bought five tickets and one for the Cambridge Footlights and stumbled happily away.

We presented our Oedipus every evening for two weeks at the Adam House in Chambers Street. The production design was ‘inspired’ by science fiction films and the principals and chorus had to wear strange costumes constructed from cut-up sheets of coloured lighting gel which were a devil to get on in time given my tight gap between performances. Peter Rumney had chosen W. B. Yeats’s translation of the Sophocles original, and I spoke the language well, in a mellifluously rhetorical kind of way, but was unable to ascend the heights of tragedy and despair that the play demanded. In fact I didn’t even reach the foothills. Oedipus Rex’s journey from commanding greatness to whimpering ruin called, in Edinburgh terms, for a Royal Mile that swooped from the elegant squares of the New Town into the sinister slums of the old. I gave them a flat Cambridge street with some pleasant window shopping but about as much pity and terror as a banana milkshake. Nor did our production do well in the turbulent competition for Fringe audiences. The Scotsman reviewer described me as the figurehead of the ship, which sounded good until she went on to explain that she meant I was imposing and wooden. Oh well. None of this worried me: I was having the time of my life. In the Mummers’ afternoon show, Artaud at Rodez, amongst other characters I played the great French actor Jean-Louis Barrault. It was directed by the dynamic and intense Pip Broughton, who had cast Jonathan Tafler (son of the film actor Sidney) in the lead role of Artaud. He was superb and dominated the stage and the production despite having to spend most of it in a straitjacket.

On my fifth evening, as soon as Oedipus came down I decellophaned myself and hurried away to join an impatient full-house queue that was shuffling its way into the theatre where the Cambridge Footlights were giving their revue, Nightcap.

‘Apparently it’s crap this year,’ I heard from someone behind me as I sat down.

‘Yeah, Nightcrap,’ tittered his companion.

It was not crap. It was astonishingly good, and the sceptical pair behind me were the first to their feet whistling and stamping approval when the curtain call came.

There were two first-years in the show, my friend Emma Thompson and a tall young man with big blue eyes, triangular red flush marks on his cheeks and an apologetic presence that was at once appallingly funny and quite inexplicably magnetic. His name, according to a programme that included helpful photographs of the cast, was Hugh Laurie. Another tall man with lighter but equally blue eyes, curly hair and a charmingly 1940s manner was the current President of the Footlights, Robert Bathurst. Martin Bergman, the previous year’s President, was in the show too, performing a clever kind of moon-faced epicene MC role. Also in the cast was an astoundingly nimble, twinkly and clownishly gifted comic actor called Simon McBurney, whom I knew because he was, as it happened, Emma’s boyfriend. This was to my shocked mind as perfect a comedy show as I had ever seen. It had never occurred to me that the Footlights would be this good. So good indeed that I instantly abandoned any dream I might have had of next year dipping my own toe in the waters of sketch comedy. I knew that I could not for a second hold my own with these people. Cool as I wasn’t, I had nonetheless absorbed the predominant cool person’s view that the Footlights Club was peopled with self-obsessed, semi-professional show-bizzy show-offs. What was so extraordinary about Nightcap was how technically perfect in delivery, writing, timing, style and confidence it was, while managing to project a wholly likeable awareness of the absurdity of the whole business of student comedy. It was grown-up and polished yet at the same time bashful and friendly; it was sophisticated and intelligent but never pretentious or pleased with itself; it had authority, finish and quality without any hint of self-regard, vanity or slickness. It was, in short, just what I believed comedy of this kind ought to be. For all that I had by now been in at least fifteen plays, some of which had been comic in some form or other, I did not believe that I would ever have the confidence to knock on the door of a Footlights Club that boasted such assured talents.

Heigh ho. At least I might be able to sneer at this Rowan Atkinson fellow. After all, what had Oxford ever done for comedy? Well, Terry Jones and Michael Palin obviously, but apart from them, what had Oxford ever done for comedy? Dudley Moore. Well, yes, apart from Palin, Jones and Moore what had …? Alan Bennett. All right. Granted. But apart from Michael Palin, Terry Jones, Dudley Moore and Alan Benn … Evelyn Waugh? Oscar Wilde? Oh all right then, damn you, maybe Oxford weren’t such duds after all. Still I went to the Wireworks not expecting that a one-man show could compete with the skill and style of Nightcap. I staggered out two hours later almost unable to walk. My sides and lungs had taken a hell of a beating. They had never been put to such paroxysmal use in their lives. You have probably seen Rowan Atkinson. If you are lucky you might have seen him on stage. If you are very, very lucky, then you might have had the experience of seeing him on stage before you had ever seen him anywhere else. That is the kind of joy that can never be reconstructed, to encounter an astounding talent for the first time with no preconceptions and no especial expectations. I had never watched Rowan Atkinson on television and I really knew nothing about him other than that his show was a hot ticket. It was called a ‘one-man show’ but actually there were two other performers: Richard Curtis, the writer of most of the material, who took the role of a kind of straight man, and Howard Goodall, who played music from an electric piano and sang a witty song of his own.

I had noticed from the programme that the staging was the work of Christopher Richardson, whom I had known when I was a schoolboy and he a master at Uppingham School.† I had a brief word with him afterwards, and he told me that the show had previewed at Uppingham.

‘The theatre has become quite a regular stop on the way between university and Edinburgh,’ he said. ‘You must bring some of your Cambridge people.’

‘Oh I don’t, I’m not … we wouldn’t …’

The drama I was doing at Cambridge suddenly seemed ordinary, worthy and desperately unexciting. I dismissed such unnecessarily negative thoughts from my mind. What was there to complain of?





Cherubs, Coming Out, Continent

The accelerando that had begun in the second term continued on my return. More drama, less academic study.

I now had the option of living out of college in digs or staying in and sharing with a fellow second-year. Kim and I chose to share, and we were rewarded with a stunning set of rooms in Walnut Tree Court. The ceiling had dark Elizabethan beams, and the walls were panelled in wood. Some of the panels were cut to reveal recessed cupboards and, in one place, an area of medieval painted plaster. There were bookshelves, a good gyp-room, window-seats, leaded panes of warped glass of great antiquity and far from contemptible furniture. With our books, records, glassware and china, my bust of Shakespeare, Kim’s bust of Wagner, Jaques chess set and Bang and Olufsen record player we were as well set up as any students in the university.

The three terms of that second year have blended and blurred in my mind. I do know that it was then that I was asked to join the Cherubs, hurrah! The initiation ceremony required the draining down of heroically repulsive and impossibly combined flagons of spirit, wine and beer. One also had to recite the meaning of the Cherubs’ emerald, navy and salmon necktie: ‘Green for Queens’ College, blue for the empyrean and pink for the cherub’s botty.’ Another duty was to declare what one would do to advance the cause of the Cherubs and Cherubism. I cannot remember what I said, something arrogant about wearing the tie on television at every opportunity when I was a famous actor, I think. Another initiate, Michael Foale, announced that he would be the first Cherub to join all the other cherubs in heaven. When pushed for an explanation he said that he intended to be the first Cherub in space. It was a preposterous claim to make. Space travellers were either American astronauts or Soviet cosmonauts. At some later, slightly less incoherently drunken Cherubs party I discovered that he had been perfectly serious. He had dual UK/US nationality, his mother being American. He was already fluent in Russian, which he had taught himself, reasoning that the future of space exploration would depend on full cooperation and collaboration between the United States and the Soviet Union. He was into his third year of a doctorate in astrophysics and a member of the RAF’s Air Training Corps, able to fly just about anything that had wings or rotors. I had never encountered such focus and determination in anyone. Seven years later he was accepted by NASA as an astronaut. He flew his first Space Shuttle mission five years after that and retired having spent over a year of his life away from earth. Until 2008 he held the American record for time spent in space – 374 days, 11 hours and 19 minutes – which is still, needless to say, a British record. I would like to say that his resolve, dedication and commitment were a life-changing example to me. Instead I thought he was potty and blush to think how I humoured him.



The Cherubs. I know we look like wankers, but really we weren’t. Honestly.

Mike Foale invited me to attend the launch of his mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope in 1999, but I couldn’t go. He invited me again to his final launch in 2003, for which he was appointed Commander of the International Space Station. Again I had to plead other commitments. What was I thinking of? Surely I could have postponed whatever it was I was doing and travelled to the launch site to watch a remarkable man doing one of the most remarkable things any human can do? I regret missing the chance deeply. I hope today’s Cherubs at Queens’ have incorporated a toast into their rituals which recognizes the most illustrious and intrepid of their heavenly host ever to don the green, blue and pink.

I soon made sure that Kim was initiated into the Cherubs too, and perhaps as a kind of thank you, or more likely because he was such a generous soul anyway, Kim offered to have a dinner jacket made for me at a grand tailoring shop on the corner of Silver and Trumpington Streets. Ede and Ravenscroft, besides being fine fashioners of a gentleman’s dress suiting, were also makers of elaborate and distinguished academic, legal, ecclesiastic and ceremonial costume of all kinds from graduate gowns to royal robes. The double-breasted dinner jacket of heavy wool they made for me was a thing of rare beauty. The facings of the lapels were of black silk as were the stripes down the side of the trouser legs. Kim felt I should have a proper shirt with separate collar to go with it as well as a good silk black bow-tie. And how could any of this be worn without proper shoes? Kim was generous with his money, but he never used it to show off. Not once did he make me feel that I was a lucky recipient of his largesse, or put me in the position of being embarrassed or overwhelmed by it. The kindness was as much in the manner of his generosity as in the quantity of it, although the latter did keep our rooms in enviable luxury. Kim’s mother often sent large hampers from Harrods, cases of wine and quantities of cashmere socks for her beloved only child. His father worked in the advertising business, something to do with the sites on which posters were put up, and it was clearly a concern that flourished. My own family’s relatively modest prosperity did not, like Kim’s, run to truffles, pâté and vintage port, but my mother was able to exhibit more often than was comfortable for a sceptic like me a most uncanny ability to know exactly when and by how much my funds were depleted. A bill from Heffer’s, the Cambridge bookshop, might arrive in my pigeonhole and loom over me and deprive me of sleep that night, and the following morning there would be a letter from Mother with a cheque and little note saying that she hoped that this might come in useful. The sum seemed nearly always to cover the bill and leave a happy amount over for wine and cakes.

My sister Jo came to stay. She adored Kim and made friends with everyone, most of whom thought she was an undergraduate, although she was only fifteen. It was in a letter to her when she was back home that I wrote something that my father saw, something that made it clear that I was gay. He got a message through to the porter’s lodge at Queens’ asking me to ring. When I called he told me that he had seen my letter to Jo, that he was sorry to have done so, but that as far as the gay thing was concerned he couldn’t be happier …

‘Oh, and your mother would love to speak to you.’

‘Darling!’

‘Oh, Mama. Are you upset?’

‘Don’t be silly. I think I’ve always known …’

It was the most marvellous relief to come out in this way.



Papa.



Mama.


My scholarly duty of saying Latin grace in hall for a week came round. I began to write occasional articles and television reviews for a student newspaper called Broadsheet, and more and more parts in more and more plays came my way. I played a disc jockey in Poliakoff’s City Sugar, a poet in Bond’s The Narrow Road to the Deep North and a Classics don in a new play by undergraduate Harry Eyre. I played kings and dukes and old counsellors in Shakespeare and killers and husbands and businessmen and blackmailers in plays old, new, neglected and revived. If Kipling’s suggestion that to fill every minute with sixty seconds’ worth of distance run is truly, as he asserted, the mark of a man, then I seemed to have become one of the most virile students in Cambridge.

In the Christmas vacation that fell between the Michaelmas and Lent terms, I accompanied the European Theatre Group on a tour of the continent, bestowing the blessing of Macbeth upon a bewildered population of Dutch, German, Swiss and French theatre-goers, mostly reluctant schoolchildren. The production was directed by Pip Broughton, who had been responsible for Artaud at Rodez, and she had cast Jonathan Tafler as the murderous thane. Illness prevented him at the last minute, however, which was a great blow to Pip, for she and Jonathan were an enchantingly devoted couple. I played King Duncan – a marvellous role for such a tour because he dies very soon in the play, and I could spend my time scoping out whichever town we were quartered in and be back in time for the curtain-call pregnant with information on the best bars and cheapest restaurants. The ETG had been founded by Derek Jacobi, Trevor Nunn and others in 1957, the year of my birth, and had earned a lamentable reputation for its frequent lapses from high seriousness and decorum. There was a rumour that the town of Grenoble had gone so far as to ban all Cambridge drama troupes from ever appearing in their town again after a notoriously drunken exhibition at a mayoral reception some time in the mid-seventies: well, drunken exhibitionism, if the story is to be believed. Our company was not as bad as that, but we did misbehave on stage. There is something about the sight of row upon row of serious Swiss schoolchildren with copies of Shakespeare on their laps studiously following the text line by line that brings out the devil in a British actor. A Word of the Day would be announced before curtain-up and prizes awarded to whichever actor could most often jemmy that word into their role. ‘There’s no weasel to find the mind’s construction in the weasel,’ I remember saying one night in Heidelberg. ‘He was a weasel in whom I placed an absolute weasel.’ And so on.

A fellow called Mark Knox, who played many parts, including the messenger who comes to tell Lady Macduff that the evil Macbeth is on his way and means her harm, discovered that his speech of warning could be sung to the tune of ‘Greensleeves’, which he did, a finger to his ear, to the great perplexity of a Bernese audience. The three witches’ ‘When shall we three meet again?’ was discovered to fit, with only minimal syllabic wrenching, the tune of ‘Hark the Herald Angels Sing’.

Somehow throughout all this, Barry Taylor, who had played the squeaking and gibbering Caliban in Ian Softley’s BATS May Week Tempest and had now been called in at the last minute to replace Jonathan Tafler, contrived to produce a superb Macbeth. If I was back early enough from my reconnoitring of the town I would stand in the wings and watch in admiration as, rising above, or sometimes even joining in, the practical jokes, he managed to convey murderous savagery, self-destructive guilt, boiling fury and terrible pain as well as I had seen. It is of course a truism of amateur acting that the cast always believes they are doing something that would stand comparison with the best professional theatre: it is rarely justified, but sometimes there are amateur performances which a pro would be proud of, and Barry Taylor’s Macbeth was one such. In my memory at least.

We spent far more time travelling between European cities in a Wallace Arnold coach than we did on stage. Devising games and time-passing occupations became a major obsession. Most of us were reading for the English tripos, and one game we played required us to write down on a slip of paper the major works of literature we had never read. I collected the slips and called out the roster of titles which included Hamlet, Animal Farm, David Copperfield, Pride and Prejudice, The Great Gatsby, Waiting for Godot … you name an obligatory must-read masterpiece and there was someone on the bus who had never read it. The wriggles of shame at the depths of our ignorance were as much pleasurable as mortifying. It is something of a relief to know that one is not alone in having a peculiar and inexplicable gap. You will want to know which title I submitted. It was D. H. Lawrence’s Women in Love, which, to my no doubt crippling disadvantage and discredit, I still have not read to this day. Nor have I read Sons and Lovers or The Rainbow. You can add all of Thomas Hardy’s novels to that list except The Mayor of Casterbridge (which I loathed). I passionately embrace Lawrence and Hardy as poets, but I find their novels unreadable. There. I feel as if I have emerged from a confessional. I hope you do not feel too let down.





Challenge 1

My first television performance came around this time. It had nothing to do with acting, but sprang from that same annoying anxiety to show off and be admired that one day, perhaps in my dotage, I will succeed in shaking off. The word had gone around the college that Queens’ was entering a team for Granada Television’s student quiz show University Challenge. I had watched this religiously since I was a child and could hardly have been more desperate to be picked for the team. The captain had been chosen by some process that I never understood, but he fully justified the appointment. He was a brilliant student of Modern and Medieval Languages called Steven Botterill, now a renowned Dante scholar and Professor at Berkeley, California. He had sensibly decided to pick the three other members of his team by compiling a list of questions and holding an open qualification test. I was infinitely more nervous and excited about sitting this little exam than the official tripos. I cannot remember the questions especially well … one was something to do with Natty Bumppo which I was relieved to be able to answer. When a handwritten note from Botterill arrived in my pigeonhole to tell me that I had been picked for the team I was almost as jubilant and irradiated with joy as the day in 1977 that my mother had telephoned Just John’s Delicatique in Norwich to break the news of my scholarship to Queens’.† The other two undergraduates chosen were a scientist called Barber and a lawyer called Mark Lester – no, not the child star of Oliver! but another Mark Lester altogether. We travelled north to Granadaland for the first round.

It was my first visit to Manchester and my first close-up encounter with a television studio. In Norwich I had once sat in the audience for the taping of a largely forgotten Anglia TV sitcom called Backs to the Land but that was the extent of my penetration of the broadcasting world. Granada was a much more impressive outfit than dear, sweet, parochial Anglia. Their studios were the home of Coronation Street and World in Action. The corridors were lined with photographs of actors, film stars and nationally known television presenters like Brian Trueman and Michael Parkinson. We were shown down a labyrinth of these passageways to a large dressing-room, where we were asked to wait. We nibbled at crisps and fruit, sipped fizzy drinks and grew steadily more and more nervous. If we won our first-round match we would have to play another team that same afternoon. If we won that, we would have to return to Manchester at a later date for quarter- and semi-finals matches. If we won those, well a third and final visit would be required. That was a lot of ifs, and suddenly I felt, and perhaps the other three did too, that I knew absolutely nothing. Every single fact I ever knew flew from me like pigeons from the sound of a gun. Humiliation awaited us. I banged the side of my head in a last-minute attempt to rewire the brain.



Universally Challenged.

The quizmaster was, of course, the marvellous Bamber Gascoigne, whose voice and features I knew as well as my parents’. He was one of those figures like the Queen and Robert Robinson: I could not remember a time when I wasn’t aware of him. A wise and kindly man, he seemed aware that other teams knew that he was a Cambridge graduate himself and therefore went out of his way to be scrupulously fair, without ever toppling over into self-conscious countercantabrigianism. He always appeared to delight in a correct answer whencesoever it came, and it was firmly believed by all that he set and researched every question himself. He was famous for his gently knowledgeable corrections – ‘Bad luck, you were thinking of Duns Scotus perhaps …’ or ‘Very close, he was of course a friend of Clausewitz …’ – an attitude at some remove from the blessed Jeremy Paxman’s scandalized shouts of ‘What?’ and expression of having bitten into a bad olive whenever an incorrect answer comes his way that offends his sense of what should be known. Autre temps, autres mæurs …

Botterill, Lester, Barber and I walked shyly on to the set, made the usual jokes about how the desks were actually side by side on the studio floor, not one on top of the other as they appeared to be on screen, and took our designated seats. I am afraid to say I cannot recall where the first-round opposition came from. Leeds University pops into my head, but I may be mistaken. No doubt they thought we were ghastly Oxbridge wankers. Looking at photographs of our team and its wild trichological variety, geeky earnestness and unhealthy complexions, we cannot be said to have been the prettiest quartet ever to greet a television audience.



‘We cannot be said to have been the prettiest quartet ever to greet a television audience.’ University Challenge.

We need not have been nervous. We were a good side and trounced all the opposition that was ranged against us right up to the final, which in those days was decided by a best-of-three encounter. For that match we found ourselves pitted against Merton, Oxford, my housemaster’s old college. They seemed a decent and bright enough bunch, but we brushed them aside in the first leg with a winning margin of over a hundred. In the second leg they won by ten points, which was maddening but set up one of the tensest finals on record. When the gong sounded for the end of the third and deciding leg the teams were exactly level. A sudden-death tie-break came into operation. Whoever got the next question would win the series. Merton buzzed in with the right answer. We were runners-up. I have rarely been so devastated or felt so cheated. It hurts even now that our team can have answered so many more questions correctly than the opposition and yet have lost. Infantile and pathetic, but even as I type these words thirty years later the blood surges in my ears and my whole being seethes with feelings of disgusted outrage, bitter resentment and maddened disappointment at such shattering injustice. Nothing will ever put it right. Nothing, I tell you, nothing. Oh well.





Corpus Christening

Back at Cambridge as the Lent term came to a close I was approached by one Mark McCrum, now a well-known travel writer but in those days a larky, impish undergraduate with a flop of black hair and eyes like glistening currants. His father, Michael, was headmaster of Eton (though shortly to return to Cambridge to take up the mastership of Corpus Christi), and his older brother, Robert, was beginning to make a name for himself in publishing at Faber and Faber. Mark McCrum, with the initiative, enterprise and guileless chutzpah that were trademark characteristics, had taken charge of a small L-shaped space in St Edward’s Passage belonging to Corpus Christi College. He and his friend Caroline Oulton planned to turn it into ‘The Playroom’, a drama venue that would specialize in new writing. I knew Caroline Oulton and adored her. She had been one of the Macbeth cast, and I had always tried to sit next to her on the coach. She stirred surprising things in me.

She and Mark had a most unexpected request. They wanted me to write a play to christen the Playroom: not necessarily full length, perhaps it could be part of a double bill? They had asked a clever young undergraduate called Robert Farrar to provide the other half of the evening. What did I think?

I was flattered, excited and alarmed, keen to try, yet scared of failing. Why did they think I might be capable of writing a play? I had never written anything close to such a thing in my life. Private poetry and the occasional article for Broadsheet were my whole writing career.

‘Go home for the vac, sit and concentrate. Write about what you know. It’ll be brilliant. But bear in mind it’s a really intimate space. Anything you can write that makes the audience feel part of things will be perfect.’

Term ended, and I returned to Norfolk. ‘Write about what you know’ is the maxim that I had most heard from writers dead and alive. In my William Morris wallpapered room at the top of the house I sat at my desk and wondered what I knew. Institutions. I knew schools and I knew prison. That was about it. ‘Involve the audience.’ Hm …

I started to write the opening of a lesson in which a prep school master harangues his Latin class, tossing back their exercise books with hyperbolic disdain: ‘Boys who rub me up the wrong way, Elwyn-Jones, come to a sticky end …’ that sort of thing. The audience are the class. There comes a sudden lighting change that alters the time scheme and the dramatic mode, bringing down the fourth wall with a crash. A knock at the door, an older master enters, a story unfolds. I wrote and wrote away, first in longhand on a pad, then typing up each scene on my treasured Hermes 3000 typewriter, a jade-green-keyed and battleship-grey-bodied machine of incomparable solidity and beauty.

I contrived a farcical plot incorporating pederasty, blackmail and romance which was interwoven with other classroom scenes involving the audience in such a way, I hoped, as to satisfy the requirements of Mark’s and Caroline’s commission.

I typed out the title page:


Latin!

or Tobacco and Boys


A New Play by

Sue Denim


Sue Denim being ‘pseudonym’ of course. I cannot quite recall why I decided to present the play under a nom de plume – I think perhaps I had some hope that if the audience believed it to have been written by a woman they might forgive the piece its less than radical milieu.

Caroline and Mark seemed pleased with it, and a friend from Queens’, Simon Cherry, agreed to direct. A law undergraduate called John Davies played the older master Herbert Brookshaw, and I played Dominic Clarke, the young hero of the play, if hero is quite the word we want.

The production sold out the Playroom for its short run of three days and so, as there seemed to be a demand for more, we performed Latin! again for a week in the Trinity Hall lecture theatre.

I was a playwright! The peculiarly exultant joy that comes over you when you have written a piece of work is like no other. Admiration and acclaim for acting performances, rousing ovations and deafening applause do not come close to the special pride you feel in having made something that was not there before out of no more exotic a material than words.

As a writer, I was approached by Emma Thompson and asked if I might contribute some comedy sketches for a show she was putting on at the ADC theatre with a group of friends. It was to showcase all-female comic talent and would be called Woman’s Hour. I swallowed an inclination to suggest that if it bore that title and had only women performing in it, then surely it should also be written exclusively by women. But it was enough of a step that women were at least putting on their own comedy show – fifty years earlier they were forbidden to act in plays in Cambridge. Indeed they were only admitted as full members of the university as recently as ten years before I was born. Alongside Emma in Woman’s Hour was the Footlights’ first-ever female President, Jan Ravens, and a young Danish-born performer called Sandi Toksvig. I wrote a few of the sketches, the only two I can remember being a parody of a book review programme and a monologue for Emma in which she played a tweedy horsey woman at a Pony Club gymkhana bellowing encouragement at her daughter. Ground-breaking, revolutionary material. The show was considered a great success, and certainly the talent of Emma, Jan and Sandi was plain for all to see.

A friend of Mark McCrum’s called Ben Blackshaw now came to me with a play he had written called Have You Seen the Yellow Book? It documented in vivid little scenes the rise and fall of Oscar Wilde. Ben wanted me for the part of Oscar. Ben directed, and we went on in the Playroom. Through this play I received my first review in a national newspaper. The Gay News critic wrote that I ‘carried the lilt of Irish without the brogue’. I kept the tiny scrap of paper that formed the entirety of his review in my wallet for years afterwards.





Chariots 1

The word went round Cambridge that a film company was looking for extras amongst the student body. They had been in touch with the presidents of the ADC, the Mummers and the Marlowe Society, who in turn had contacted the acting world. Kim and I hurried to sign our names up for international stardom.

I had a friend at Oxford who had written to me proudly to say the great Michael Cimino was directing a major picture there called Heaven’s Gate and that he had a walk-on part in it. I now called him to let him know that we had filming in our midst too.

‘Oh yes?’ he said. ‘Which studio? We’re United Artists.’

‘Oh. I don’t think ours is exactly an American studio-type film,’ I had to confess. ‘Apparently it’s about a group of British athletes in the 1924 Olympics. One of them is Jewish and the other one is a devout Presbyterian who won’t run on Sundays or something. Colin Welland has written the screenplay. It’s … well … anyway.’

As I put the phone down I could hear my friend’s snorts of derisive Oxonian laughter. There was something rather humiliating about Cambridge being chosen for such a small parochial film while Oxford got a big-budget major motion picture. Neither of us were to know that Heaven’s Gate would all but destroy United Artists and be for ever listed as one of the greatest financial disasters in Hollywood history while our little film …

It was called Chariots of Fire, and I spent a number of bemusedly excited days as an extra. The first was in the Senate House for a Freshers’ Fair scene in which the lead actors get recruited by the University Athletics Club and Gilbert and Sullivan Society. All light-headed from a free but fierce haircut, I had earned myself an extra two pounds even before the filming began by bringing my own striped college blazer and flannels as costume. I looked the most dreadful arse as I manned a tennis club stall, bouncing a ball on a racket and trying to give the impression that I might be hearty. With the more important role of Captain of the Cambridge University Athletics Team, one of Cambridge’s sporting heroes was just along from me: Derek Pringle, who went on to play cricket for Essex and England.

I was most astonished when a props man, just before the camera rolled, came up and gave me a collection of small visiting cards on which were printed ‘Cambridge University Tennis Club’ below an image of crossed tennis rackets. I had to peer closely to decipher the sloping New Palace print – the likelihood of the camera capturing this seemed absurdly remote. It struck me as the most astounding waste of time and money, but of course I knew nothing about filming or the necessity of being prepared for any eventuality. No matter how detailed the pre-production planning and preparation, circumstances like weather, light, noise, the failure of a crane or the indisposition of an actor or crew member can alter everything. It was quite possible that the director may have decided that the scene that day needed to open with a close shot of someone taking a tennis club card and if it hadn’t been there ready, waiting and perfectly printed, filming would have been delayed, and much more money would have been lost than the price of producing a few visiting cards. None of that occurred to me, of course; I just leapt to the conclusion, as people always do, that film-makers were imbecile profligates. I now know, being one, that they are imbecile misers.

For the whole of the first day I assumed that the crew member positioning us all, telling us where and when to move and yelling for silence and calling for the camera to ‘turn over’ must be the director, whose name I knew to be Hugh Hudson. At one point, needing clarification, I started a question with, ‘Excuse me, Mr Hudson …’, and he laughed and pointed to a languid man sitting in a chair reading a newspaper. ‘I’m just the first assistant,’ he said, ‘that’s the director.’

If a director didn’t shout and tell people when to move and how to hold their props and where to look then what, I wondered, did he do? It all seemed most mysterious.

The rumour went round Cambridge, after only three or four days’ ‘shooting’ as we pros now called it, that certain university authorities had read the script, disapproved of its implications and summarily withdrawn from the production company all permissions to film. It seems that the story portrayed the Masters of Trinity and Gonville and Caius Colleges, played by John Gielgud and Lindsay Anderson, as anti-Semitic snobs. Their present-day descendants had decided that this was not to be countenanced.

Oh well, we thought. That was that. Fun while it lasted. But the film’s producer, David Puttnam, either out of loyalty or for more practical reasons of financial economy, did not fire us. He quickly acquired Eton College as an alternative location, and we were all bussed out to Berkshire, using the nearby Bray Studios as a base. At Eton they shot one of the most memorable scenes in the film, the Great Court Run in which Harold Abrahams and Lord Lindsay, played by Ben Cross and Nigel Havers, run a complete circuit of the outer perimeter of Trinity Great Court in the forty-three seconds or so (depending on the clock’s last winding) that it takes for the chimes to strike twelve, a feat that Sebastian Coe just failed to emulate in 1988. School Yard at Eton is probably a quarter the size of Trinity Great Court, but camera angles managed to disguise the fact that even I could probably have run round it in forty-three seconds. My role in this scene, along with just about everyone else’s, was to cheer and throw my boater wildly in the air.

Filming the scene seemed to take an extraordinarily long time. I could not believe how long: it occurred to me that everyone must be extremely incompetent and that it could surely all have been done so much more quickly and efficiently. I now know that the days were all managed with exemplary order and speed. To an outsider, filming always appears both intolerably boring and horribly disorganized. When you do not understand how something works it is perhaps natural to question and to doubt. In later years, when – as so often might happen – a passer-by on a street shoot I was involved with expostulated at ‘all those people’ and how ‘most of them are just hanging around doing nothing’ and then offered the suggestion that ‘I suppose it’s all under the control of the unions’, I would, to tamp down my indignation at such rudeness, force myself to remember my own scepticism when an extra on Chariots of Fire. That scepticism was shared by many, and so bored did the majority become and so ill-used did they feel themselves to be that they staged a mini-strike. They all sat down in School Yard and chanted for more pay. It staggers me how greedy and rude we could have been, and I am pleased to say that Kim and I were not among the bolshie faction. Puttnam appeared before us and sportingly and without the least sign of annoyance or disappointment agreed to pay us all an extra two pounds each. We cheered him louder than we had been asked to cheer the race.

If you happen one day to be watching Chariots of Fire and want to spot me for reasons into which I will not inquire, then the Gilbert and Sullivan entertainment that takes place after the matriculation dinner is the scene to find. I’m lurking and smirking in the background. It is one of nature’s cruellest curses on me. No matter how soulful, sweet and unselfconscious I try to appear, my features always arrange themselves into an expression of utmost self-satisfaction, self-awareness and self-love. So unfair.

Back in Cambridge, life continued its jolly round. Simon Cherry, who had directed Latin!, was chosen by BATS to direct the 1980 May Week production. He cast me as the warty old king in All’s Well That Ends Well. Emma Thompson played Helena, Kim had a variety of parts, and Barry Taylor played Parolles.



Playing the King in All’s Well That Ends Well, BATS May Week production 1980, in Queens’ Cloister Court.

Barry, whose Macbeth had so impressed me, was an extraordinary man and one who made me, without meaning to, feel very guilty and ashamed. He was as genuinely intelligent, perceptive, wise, learned, skilled at writing and academically gifted as anyone I had ever met, but as far as Cambridge and life in the world outside was concerned he had one huge defect, one appalling flaw. He was honest. He had integrity. Honesty and integrity are fine virtues in so far as they go, but they are fatal when it comes to sitting exams. He was in the year above me, so this was his last term at Cambridge, and finals beckoned. If anyone should have got a First and stayed on to research and become a valued teacher and academic it should have been Barry. But his fatal flaw meant that when he sat in the examination hall and turned over the paper he would try to answer the question. He would sit and think about it. He would ponder avenues of approach. He would start, cross out what he had written, have another think and only commit to paper his most considered judgements, appraisals and conclusions. By the time the whistle blew for the end of the three hours, during which time three questions should have been addressed and three essays completed, Barry would hand in one perfect essay and half of a very good one, leaving the third question entirely unanswered. He had done this in Part Ones the year before and he himself knew that he would probably do it in the Finals of the English tripos that were rapidly approaching. He wrote with delicacy and style, and his literary insights and moral, social and aesthetic perceptions were of far more value and depth than mine, but he simply could not master the art of time-keeping or manage the compromise of giving examiners what they wanted. He came from a working-class family who lived south-east of London. He told me that on the rare occasions that public-school boys had got on to the bus in Southend or the Isle of Dogs and asked for a ticket in their posh accents, he and his friends at the back would do cawing, honking, drawling impersonations of them. Not threateningly or violently, but because the sounds were so peculiar to their ears. It was hard for them to believe that anyone, especially anyone their age, really spoke like that. Then Barry arrived in Cambridge and found that he was the one with the unusual accent, and suddenly ra-ra public-school speech was the norm. It took him some time to believe that anyone with such an accent could be anything other than a dim chinless wonder.

How Barry must have regarded a man like me, slick and deceitful enough to answer exam questions in just the way that achieved the best results with the least effort yet gifted with enough of a memory and knowledge to disguise it as authentic academic achievement, I don’t know. Add to that my public-school manner and apparent confidence and I cannot but think that I made up just the kind of package that anyone with spirit would be most likely to despise.

Cambridge might have argued, should they have been moved to do so, that their examination system is perfectly suited to the real world. Success in politics, journalism, the Civil Service, advertising, the Foreign Office, the City and so many of the grander fields of professional endeavour rely on the ability quickly to master the essentials of a brief, to subdue material to one’s will, to present, promote and pimp, to massage facts and figures and to do all with speed, polish, ease and confidence. The tripos weeds out the slow, the honest, the careful, the considered and the excessively truthful – all of whom would be grossly unsuited to public life or high-profile careers.

My cynicism and self-criticism may seem distorted and overstated, but I do not think I exaggerate so very much. Certainly the distinction between Barry Taylor’s diligent integrity and my own indolent technique remains symbolic of something that is wrong in education and testing. Having said which, Cambridge was not so foolish as entirely to fail to recognize Barry’s qualities, and he did subsequently have a career in academia despite not getting the First-Class degree that a better system of examination would undoubtedly have awarded him. On the other hand, if continuous assessment existed in my day, and had there been a greater emphasis on written work and research and less on scrambling to produce essays against the clock in the examination hall, I would have been booted out within months. Perhaps two streams of testing are required: one for plausible bounders like me and another for authentic minds like Barry.





Caledonia 2

A second Edinburgh Fringe season approached. This time I was exclusively bound up with the Cambridge Mummers, the drama club for whom I had appeared in Artaud at Rodez the previous year. Despite their reputation for progressive programming and emphasis on the modern, radical and avant-garde, they asked if I might consider allowing Latin! to join their repertoire. Caroline Oulton had written a play about the Swiss kinetic sculptor Jean Tinguely; a friend called Oscar Moore had written a piece whose title I forget but which had darkly funny things to say about Dunstable; Simon McBurney and Simon Cherry were preparing a one-man show in which McBurney would play Charles Bukowski. A children’s play was also being devised, and the main evening show would be a production of the rarely performed Middleton and Dekker comedy The Roaring Girl with Annabelle Arden in the title role, under the direction of Brigid Larmour. It was Annabelle and Brigid who had co-directed the production of Travesties in which I had first seen Emma Thompson. All these shows would be presented for two weeks in that same cramped but historic Riddle’s Court venue off the Royal Mile.

After the May Term finished and I had completed my usual summer stint at Cundall Manor we rehearsed for two weeks in Cambridge. I stayed in digs (Queens’ was earning money from renting itself out for a business conference) near Magdalene with Ben Blackshaw and Mark McCrum, who had, with what grown-ups call ‘commendable enterprise’, started a business called ‘Picnic Punts’. Every morning they would get up, dress themselves in striped blazers, white flannel trousers and boaters and go down to a mooring just opposite Queens’, where they kept a single punt. A wooden plank with a white cloth would be placed athwart the vessel as a table, a wind-up gramophone, ice bucket and all the accoutrements required to serve a cream tea with strawberries and champagne would be stowed somewhere, and Mark would erect a handwritten sign on the Silver Street Bridge with illustrations (he was handy at drawing and calligraphy) advertising a punt-ride up or down the Cam in the company of genuine undergraduates.

Ben was pretty and fey and blond and Mark impish and darkly handsome. The dreamy sight of them in their Edwardian whites was guaranteed to appeal to American tourists, day-tripping matrons and visiting schoolmasters of a Uranian disposition. Sometimes, as I hurried across a bridge between rehearsals, I might hear a Gershwin tune echoing off the stonework of the Bridge of Sighs or the slowing down and rapid rewinding of a Benny Goodman foxtrot drifting across the meadow opposite King’s and I would smile as I saw Ben and Mark poling their way along the Backs, cheerfully making up outrageous and incredible stories about Byron or Darwin for the edification of their credulous and awestruck customers. At day’s end, I would come back from my rehearsals, and they would return from the river, muscles aching, tired from talking nonsense, their day’s takings wrapped in the tablecloth, which would be emptied on the kitchen table. Every last currency note and coin was scooped up and taken to the grocer’s in Jesus Lane to be spent on meat and pasta for that evening and bottles of wine and tea things and champagne for the following day’s punting. I don’t think Mark and Ben turned a penny’s profit, but they got themselves fit, ate and drank well and inadvertently started a trend in ‘authentic student punts’ that is going to this day in the hands of much savvier and harder-nosed entrepreneurs. Not once did either of them suggest that I contribute to the nightly supper fund, despite the fact that I always ate and drank the food and wine that it bought. There was a carefree charm to the pair that made me feel heavy, bourgeois and over-earnest.

I had agreed to be in The Roaring Girl, as well as reprising my role as Dominic Clarke in Latin!, with John Davies still in the part of Herbert Brookshaw. Simon Cherry would be directing once again and he had asked David Lewis, a History of Art student with whom he shared rooms in Queens’, to design a poster. The result was sensational. In the style of an Edwardian children’s storybook jacket Dave’s design depicted a school-uniformed boy and a young man in a teacher’s gown kissing, with a cricket game going on in the background. It was stunningly well done; the lettering, the colour palette, the whole look of it was exquisite. It shocked, but it was also funny, elegant and charming, which is what I hoped the play might be.

The Mummers’ producers, Jo and David, sent an army of volunteers (in other words the cast) around Edinburgh as soon as we arrived, to staple and paste up the posters for all our shows wherever we could. It soon became apparent that the Latin! poster was in great demand. The moment it went up it would be pinched, even if we took the common precautionary step of ripping it first to decrease its collectability. I started to get messages left for me at Mummers’ headquarters in Riddle’s Court offering money for spares. It had become a collector’s item. In a rare burst of entrepreneurial PR zeal, I called up the Scotsman, pretending to be upset that our poster was being stolen as soon as it was put up. Sure enough, they obligingly ran a small paragraph with a picture of the poster, under the mini-headline: ‘Is this the most stolen poster in Edinburgh?’ The box-office went through the roof, and Latin! was sold out for the whole of the two weeks of its run.



Latin! The most stolen poster of the 1980 Edinburgh Fringe.

Latin! played in the mid-afternoon, but the main evening attraction was the The Roaring Girl. One of its cast members was a handsome and amusing Trinity Hall undergraduate called Tony Slattery, who had the look of a young Charles Boyer and the habits of an ill-trained but affectionate puppy. He read Modern and Medieval Languages, specializing in French and Spanish. He had represented Britain at judo, becoming national champion at his weight in his teens. He sang and played the guitar and was capable of being most dreadfully funny. Every night, in his role as some kind of foppish lord, he would put a larger and larger feather in his hat. By the time we came to the end of the first week it was brushing the ceiling. The entire cast, including Annabelle Arden, who had the lead role of Moll Cutpurse, fell into unrestrained giggles each time he executed a low bow which caused this enormous plume to bounce and waggle over our heads or into our faces. Sometimes when actors corpse it amuses the audience, but when it goes too far they often start to stir and mutter and hiss, which was what happened that evening. It was deeply unprofessional – but being deeply unprofessional was one of the marvellous things about being students and being, well, not professional.

We all squeezed into digs somewhere in the New Town, hunkering down in sleeping bags on the floor, and even managed to make room for my sister Jo who came to visit and got on very well with certain members of the company. It was a wonderful time; the plays were all successful in their own way and we attracted good audiences. The pleasure was compounded by excellent reviews; the notoriously difficult Nicholas de Jongh was blush-makingly nice: ‘Stephen Fry is a name I shall look out for in the future, which is more than can be said for most of the writers and performers on the Fringe,’ he wrote. I have since been a sore disappointment to de Jong, I think, but at least we got off on the right foot. Even better news came when the Scotsman awarded us a Fringe First, the award that everyone aspired to win in those days.



Solemn but triumphant in the Mummers group photo celebrating our Fringe First Award.



A moment later, responding to Tony Slattery and revealing an unsurprising cigarette.

There was little time to see any other shows. Electric Voodoo, this year’s Footlights Revue, was composed of completely different performers from the year before. Hugh Laurie, that tall fellow with a flag of crimson on each cheek, wasn’t in it, nor were Emma or Simon McBurney. Emma did come to Riddle’s Court to see Latin! and she brought the Laurie chap with her.

‘Hullo,’ he said when she pushed him forward to meet me after the show.

‘Hullo,’ I said.

‘That was very good,’ he said. ‘I really enjoyed it.’

‘Thank you,’ I said. ‘That is very kind.’

The triangles on his cheeks flamed redder than ever, and he popped off. I didn’t give him much more thought. That night we had a party to celebrate the Fringe First. How tall and serious I look in the photograph.





Conveniences

In the late September of 1980 I arrived back in Cambridge for my final year. Although we could each have had a single set again, Kim and I decided that we wanted to carry on sharing and we were allocated A2 in the medieval tower of Old Court, the finest undergraduate rooms in college. Many graduates and dons had accommodation far less grand. The rooms boasted magnificent built-in bookshelves, a noble fireplace, an excellent gyp-room and bedrooms. The windows looked out on one side over Old Court and on the other on to the Master’s Lodge of St Catharine’s, the abode of the august Professor of Mathematics Sir Peter Swinnerton-Dyer, who was currently enjoying a period as Vice-Chancellor. The most prized item of furniture we added came in the form of a mahogany table that cleverly opened up into a wooden lectern. I had borrowed this from Trinity College as a prop for a lunchtime reading of the poems of Ernst Jandl and had somehow failed to return it. Kim added his Jaques chess set, Bang and Olufsen stereo, Sony Trinitron television and Cafetière coffee jug. We were far from the great age of designer labels, but brand names were beginning to acquire a new significance and desirability. I owned a pistachio-coloured Calvin Klein shirt whose loss I still mourn and a pair of olive-green Kickers of such surpassing splendour that I sob just to think of them.

On the ground floor at the foot of our staircase a smaller set of rooms had been taken over by the college and transformed into something quite marvellous and strange and new: a ladies’ lavatory. The outer room was fitted with a large dressing-table with bulbs around the side of its mirror. On this table were boxes of coloured tissues, a glass jar of Q-tips and a pretty painted porcelain bowl filled with powder-blue, baby-pink and Easter-yellow balls of cotton wool. A basket-weave chair freshly painted in white gloss was tucked into the valance or pelmet of flower-printed chintz that underhung the table. On the pink-painted walls were three different coin-operated sanitary towel and tampon machines. In the lavatory itself a complex incinerator for used examples of same stood next to the toilet, and hanging off the back of the door could be seen a thick swatch of brown Lil-lets disposal bags. The whole place screamed, ‘You are a woman. Don’t even think of forgetting it.’

Queens’ College, after 532 years of single-sex status, had decided to go co-ed. Women undergraduates had arrived this term as full members of the college.

I can picture the scenes at the meeting of the college’s governing Fellows. The President coughs for attention.

‘Gentlemen! As you know, this body voted two years ago for women to be …’

‘I didn’t!’

‘Nor I!’

‘Er, yes, thank you Doctor Bantrey, Professor Threlfall. A majority of Fellows voted for the admission of women. Next term, as you know, will see our first intake …’

‘Will they eat with the rest of us?’

‘Well, of course they will eat with us, Dr Kemp, why on earth shouldn’t they?’

‘Well I thought they ate … differently.’

‘Differently?’

‘They pick up their food with their mouths, don’t they? Or am I thinking of cats?’

‘Dr Kemp, have you actually ever met a woman?’

‘Er … well, not that you’d … my mother was a woman. Was introduced when I was seven. Used to see her at mealtimes occasionally. Does that count?’

‘And did she eat normally?’

‘Let me think … now you come to mention it, yes, she did, yes. Quite normally.’

‘Well, there you are then. There is, however, the issue of cloacal arrangements. Women do of course have hygienic requirements that are … somewhat sui generis.’

‘Oh yes? In what way?’

‘Ah … well, to be honest I’m not actually sure on this one myself. But I believe every now and again they are required to shout and to slap a man and then burst into tears and … er … then they have to blow their nose or something. And do their hair. Something along those lines. This happens regularly once a month, I am told. So we will need specially designed rooms set aside for the purpose.’

‘I knew no good would come of this.’

‘Hear fucking hear.’

‘Gentlemen, please! If we can just …’

‘And where are they going to hang their breasts at night? Answer me that.’

‘Excuse me?’

‘Women have extra mounds of flesh that they attach with wire suspenders and silk peggings to the front of their chests. I know that much at least. The question is, where are they going to hang them at night? Hm? You see? You just haven’t thought this thing through, have you?’

And so on … until the meeting broke up in disarray.

With the exception of the startling lavatories the arrival of The Women turned out to be the most natural thing in the world. It seemed impossible to believe that they had never been here before. Whether they took to the more honkingly earthy college institutions like the Kangaroos, the college’s sporting club, or indeed to the Cherubs, of which I was now leader or Senior Member, I cannot quite say. Since, by definition, all the women in college were first-years (how they must have tired of the terms ‘freshettes’ and ‘undergraduettes’) there were none quartered in Old Court, hence none to use the gleaming Ladies at the foot of A staircase. It became, therefore, our private poo-palace. Which is how I know the towel-bag legend off by heart: ‘Lil-lets expand widthways to mould themselves gently to your shape. If you have any questions write to Sister Marion …’

Kim and I were lovers by this time, and it was a happy state to be in. He played chess, read Thucydides, Aristotle and Cicero and boomed Wagner over Old Court, sweetening it with gigantic moments from Verdi and Puccini. I learnt my lines, typed the occasional essay on my Hermes typewriter, read, smoked and chattered. Friends came up the stairs and stayed for long afternoons of toast, coffee and then wine. We were closest with Rob Wyke, a graduate from St Catharine’s who taught in college and worked on his thesis. He had played Gonzago in The Tempest. He, Paul Hartell, another PhD student at Cat’s, and a third wild and wonderful graduate called Nigel Huckstep formed a triumvirate in whose company Kim and I loved to be. Their range of reference was enormous, but they wore their learning lightly. On free evenings we would ‘draaj’ (which Nigel, who picked up languages as easily as infants pick up infections, claimed was an Afrikaans word for saunter) past King’s, down Trinity Street and to the Baron of Beef pub in Bridge Street, where the dirt was dished on all of Cambridge.





Committees

As a third-year now I found myself on innumerable committees. Aside from being the President of the May Ball, Senior Member of Cherubs (‘I’ve seen ya member, Senior Member!’ being the obvious chant) and President of BATS, I was on the committees of the ADC, Mummers and several other drama clubs. This meant that, at the opening of term, I found myself bouncing from meeting to meeting, listening to directors ‘pitching’, as we would now say.

It went like this. Let us say you are a director, or want to be one. You choose a play – new or classic – you decide how you mount it, prepare a speech about your ‘concept’, draw up a sensible budget and get yourself on the list to be heard by each of the larger drama societies. All this would now be done with presentation and spreadsheet software I suppose, but back then it was bits of paper and speechifying.

At a meeting of the ADC a first-year brimful of confidence arrived. He had the pained, coat-muffled-up look of a sensitive socialist who finds everything around him violent and faintly oppressive.

‘I am very very interested in the work of Grotowski and Brook,’ he told us. ‘My production of Serjeant Musgrave’s Dance will utilize their theories, combined with elements of Brechtian Epic. I will dress the cast only in white and red. The set will be scaffolding.’

Gosh. Well. Absolutely. We consulted amongst ourselves after he left. Jolly bright fellow. Serjeant Musgrave. Hadn’t been done for fifteen years so far as we could tell. Interesting ideas. Cheap too. Definitely worth considering.

We see a few more candidates, and I rush off to Trinity Hall, where we hold a similar meeting for the Mummers. The third candidate to come into the room to pitch is that same intense first-year who had appeared before the ADC committee. He sits down.

‘I am very very interested in the work of Grotowski and Brook,’ he announces. ‘My production of ’Tis Pity She’s a Whore will utilize their theories, combined with elements of Brechtian Epic …’ He breaks off and gives me a look of uncertainty. Has he seen me before somewhere? He shakes his head and continues. ‘I will dress the cast only in white and red. The set will be scaffolding.’

A few more candidates, and I’m off to Queens’ for a BATS meeting. Sure enough, there is that first-year again. He really is covering all the bases.

‘I am very interested in the work of Grotowski and Brook. My production of The Importance of Being Earnest will utilize their theories …’

‘Combined with elements of Brechtian Epic?’ I ask. ‘Possibly dressed in white and red? Scaffolding?’

‘Er …’

That first-year is now a successful homme de théâtre and an artistic director of distinction. I do not know how many of his current productions are dressed in white and red, but his scaffold-clad My Fair Lady, utilizing the theories of Grotowski and Brook (combined, I am told, with elements of Brechtian Epic Theatre), wowed them in Margate last summer. No, but shush.

I loathed committee meetings then and I loathe them now. My whole life has been a fight to avoid them as much as possible. A losing fight. I would so much rather do things than talk about doing them. Those who sit in committee rooms rule the world, of course, which is lovely if that is what you want to do, but those who rule the world get so little opportunity to run about and laugh and play in it.

It was a relief then to be cast as Volpone in a production at the ADC. A second-year from Caius called Simon Beale played Sir Politic Would-Be and all but ate up the stage with the most astonishing comic physicality and outrageous upstaging. At one point in the second act he stood talking to me, his back to the audience. I was always rather mystified why my excellent speech to him got so many laughs. It’s unsettling when you don’t know where laughs come from. I discovered that Simon Beale was scratching his arse throughout the whole scene. Had it been from an actor less accomplished or a person less adorable I suppose I might have been miffed. He also sang beautifully and was possessed of perfect pitch. There was a market scene that required singing – not from me, of course, but from the rest of the cast. Simon would stand in the wings, everyone huddled around him, and give out the note. After the performance, as a treat, he would sing ‘Dalla sua pace’ or ‘Un’aura amorosa’ for me, and I would melt into a puddle. One night the venerable Shakespearean scholar and Emeritus Professor of English L. C. Knight, affectionately known as Elsie, was in the audience. He left a note for me at the stage door telling me that in his opinion my Volpone was superior to Paul Scofield’s. ‘Better shaped, better spoken and more believable. The finest I have ever seen.’ How like me to remember that word for word. The old boy was almost eighty, of course, and almost certainly deaf and demented, but I was, nevertheless, wildly proud. Too proud to show the note to anyone other than Kim and the director, for my pride in refusing to allow myself to appear boastful or pleased with myself was even more intense than any pride I might have had in my achievements. There was sometimes a fight between these two species of pride, but usually the first type won and was mistakenly called modesty.

Early one evening during the weeklong run of Volpone I arrived backstage at the ADC theatre and tripped on a pile of boxes in the corridor. They were programmes for the following week’s ADC production, dumped on the floor by the delivery man from the printers. The play was Serjeant Musgrave’s Dance, the Grotowski–Brook obsessive having been duly awarded his slot. I read through his programme notes.


Work. Discipline. Comradeship. Work and discipline and comradeship.

Only with these three can we create a true socialist theatre.


I took the boxes to my dressing-room and hunted for a pen. An hour later the programmes had been returned to their boxes. The director’s notes now read:


Work. Discipline. Comradeship. Work and discipline and comradeship.

Only with these three can we create a true national socialist theatre.


I saw him later that evening looking white and furious and felt that I had been a hideous beast. But really. I mean. Did Shakespeare call actors ‘workers’ or ‘players’?





Cycle

The next week Kim surprised me with plans for an exeat from Cambridge. He had bought tickets for Götz Friedrich’s Ring Cycle at the Royal Opera House in London. Monday Das Rheingold, Tuesday Die Walküre, Wednesday off, Thursday Siegfried, Friday off and Saturday Götterdämmerung. A week of Valkyries and Niebelungs and Gods and Heroes and Norns and Giants. It was my first visit to Covent Garden and my first experience of live Wagner. Not my last. Indeed, today, as I type this, is a Tuesday. I was at a Götterdämmerung just three nights ago. It gets into your blood. Well, my blood. Probably not yours. All Wagnerians know the film that descends over the eyes of those to whom they talk about their obsession, so I will say no more save to point out what is perhaps obvious, that it was a shattering experience and a life-changingly important week for me.





Comedy Colleague, Collaborator and Comrade

A far more life-changingly important moment and a yet more shattering experience was heaving to on the horizon.

Amongst the friends that came to visit A2 was Emma Thompson. Having taken a year off from the Footlights, she was back in the club as Vice-President for her final year. She arrived one early evening and plonked herself on our excellent sofa.

‘You remember Hugh Laurie?’

‘Er … remind me.’

She flung an impatient cushion at my head. ‘You know perfectly well who I mean. He was in Nightcap.’

‘Oh, the tall chap with the flushed cheeks and the big blue eyes?’

‘Exactly. Well he’s the President of Footlights this year.’

‘Coo.’

‘Yes, and he needs someone to write sketches with. He wants me to bring you over to his rooms at Selwyn.’

‘Me? But I don’t know him … how … what?’

‘Yes you do!’ She flung two cushions in succession. ‘I introduced you at Edinburgh.’

‘You did?’

There were no cushions left so she flung me a speaking glance instead. Possibly the speakingest glance that had been flung in Cambridge that year. ‘For someone with such a good memory,’ she said, ‘you have a terrible memory.’

Kim, Emma and I walked up Sidgwick Avenue towards Selwyn College. It was a cold November night, and the air held a smell of gunpowder from a Bonfire Night party being held somewhere near the Fen Causeway. We came to a Victorian building on the rugby-ground side of Grange Road, not far from Cambridge’s newest college, Robinson.

Emma led us through the open street door and up some stairs. She knocked on a door at the end of the corridor. A voice grunted for us to enter.

He was sitting on the edge of his bed, a guitar on his knee. At the other side of the room was his girlfriend, Katie Kelly, whom I knew slightly. Like Emma, she read English at Newnham. She was very pretty and had long blonde hair and a ravishing smile.

He stood awkwardly, the red flags of his cheeks more pronounced than ever. ‘Hullo,’ he said.

‘Hullo,’ I said.

We were both people who said ‘hullo’ rather than ‘hello’.

‘Red wine or white?’ said Katie.

‘I’ve been writing a song,’ he said and started to strum on his guitar. The song was a kind of ballad sung in the character of an American IRA supporter.


Give money to an IRA bomber?

Why, yessir, I’d consider it an honour,

Everybody must have a cause.


The accent was flawless and the singing superb. It seemed to me a perfect song.

‘Woolworths,’ he said as he laid the instrument down. ‘I borrow guitars that cost ten times as much, but they just don’t do it for me.’

Katie approached with the wine. ‘Well, are you going to tell him?’

‘Ah. Yes. Well, thing is. Footlights. I’m the President, you see.’

‘I saw you in Nightcap you were magnificent it was brilliant,’ I said in a rush.

‘Oh. Gosh. Well. No. Really? Well, er … Latin! Top. Absolutely top.’

‘Nonsense, oh shush.’

‘Completely.’

The excruciating horror of mutual admiration out of the way, we both paused, unsure of how to continue.

‘Well, go on,’ said Emma.

‘Yes. So. There are two Smokers left this term, but most importantly there’s the panto.’

‘The panto?’

‘Yup. The Footlights pantomime. Two years ago we did Aladdin.’

‘Hugh was the Emperor of China,’ Katie said.

‘I missed that, I’m afraid,’ I said.

‘Quite right. I would have too. If I hadn’t been in it. Anyway, this year we’re doing The Snow Queen.’

‘Hans Christian Andersen?’

‘Yup. Katie and I have been writing it. We’ve got this …’ he showed me some script.

Five minutes later Hugh and I were writing a scene together as if we had been doing it all our lives.

You read about people falling suddenly in love, about romantic thunderbolts that go with clashing cymbals, high quivering strings and resounding chords and you read about eyes that meet across the room to the thudding twang of Cupid’s bow, but it is less often that you read about collaborative love at first sight, about people who instantly discover that they were born to work together or born to be natural and perfect friends.

The moment Hugh Laurie and I started to exchange ideas it was starkly and most wonderfully clear that we shared absolutely the same sense of what was funny and the same scruples, tastes and sensitivities as to what we found derivative, cheap, obvious or stylistically unacceptable. Which is not to say that we were similar. If the world is full of plugs looking for sockets and sockets looking for plugs, as – roughly speaking – the Platonic allegory of love suggests, then there is no doubt we did seem each to possess precisely the qualities and deficiencies the other most lacked. Hugh had music where I had none. He had an ability to be likeably daft and clownish. He moved, tumbled and leapt like an athlete. He had authority, presence and dignity. I had … hang on, what did I have? Patter and fluency, I suppose. Verbal dexterity. Learning. Hugh always said that I also added what he called gravitas to the proceedings. Although he had great authority himself on stage I suppose I had the edge on playing older authority figures. I wrote too. I mean I actually physically wrote lines down with pen and paper or typewriter. Hugh kept the phrases and shapes of the monologues and songs he was working on in his head and only wrote them down or dictated them when a script was needed for stage-management or administrative purposes.

Hugh was determined that the Footlights should look grown-up but never pleased with itself or, God forbid, cool. We both shared a horror of cool. To wear sunglasses when it wasn’t sunny, to look pained and troubled and emotionally raw, to pull that sneery snorty ‘Er?!! What?!’ face at things that you didn’t understand or from which you thought it stylish to distance yourself. Any such arid, self-regarding stylistic narcissism we detested. Better to look a naive simpleton than jaded, tired or world-weary, we felt. ‘We’re students, for fuck’s sake,’ was our credo. ‘We have people making our beds and tidying our rooms for us. We live in panelled medieval rooms. We have theatres, printing presses, first-class cricket pitches, a river, boats, libraries and all the time in the world for contentment, pleasure and fun. What right have we got to moan and moon and mooch about the place looking tortured?’

We were fortunate that the age of young people doing stand-up comedy hadn’t yet arrived. The idea, and I am afraid it has since become a reality, of pained emo students leaning listless and misunderstood on a mike-stand railing against the burden of life would be more than either of us would have been able to bear. We were exceptionally attuned to pretension, aesthetic discord and hypocrisy. The young are so priggish. I hope we are much more tolerant now.

Almost no one we ever worked with either at Cambridge or afterwards quite seemed to share or even understand our aesthetic, if I can dignify it with such a word. It is probable that our fear of being unoriginal, of looking cocky, of being obvious or of being seen ever to have chosen the line of least resistance caused us difficulty in our comedy careers. The same fears might also have pushed us to some of our best endeavours too, so there is no real reason to regret the sensitivity and fastidiousness that only we appeared to share. We soon became familiar with the expressions of bewilderment that might flicker over the faces of those who suggested something that inadvertently trespassed against our instinctive sense of what could or could not be funny, right or fit. I don’t think we were ever aggressive or unkind, certainly not deliberately, but when two people are absolutely in harness with regard to matters of principle and outlook it must be very alienating to outsiders, and I expect two tall public-school figures like us must have seemed forbidding and aloof. Inside, of course, we felt anything but. I would not want to paint a picture of us as earnest, dogmatic ideologues, the Frank and Queenie Leavis of Comedy. We spent most of our time laughing. The smallest things would set us off like teenagers, which of course we had only just stopped being.

Hugh had come up to Cambridge from Eton College as a successful international youth oarsman, having pulled himself through the water to gold with his schoolfriend James Palmer in the coxless pairs event in the Junior Olympics and at Henley. Back in the thirties his father had been in a winning Cambridge Blue boat for each of his three years and went on to row in the British eight at the Berlin Olympics of 1936 and again in the coxless pairs in the 1948 London games, where he and his partner Jack Wilson won gold. Had glandular fever not struck, Hugh would certainly have rowed for the university straight away but, denied by his illness a seat in the Blue boat for his first year, he looked about for something else to do and found himself cast in Aladdin and then, two terms later, Nightcap. In his second year he abandoned the Footlights and did what he had come to Cambridge to do, pull that rowing-boat through the water. On the river by five or six in the morning, hours of backbreaking rowing, then road work, gym work and more time on the river. He got his Blue in the 1980 boat race, which Oxford won by a canvas, the closest result there had ever been. You can imagine the disappointment. How many times he must have revisited every yard of that race in his head. Upping the stroke rate by one beat a minute, just one neater piece of steering on the bend, 2 per cent more effort at Hammersmith … it must have been heartbreaking to have come so close. I tried to tell him that my own experience of losing to Merton in the final of University Challenge meant that I knew exactly how he felt. The look he gave me could have stripped the flesh from a rhinoceros.



Unable to afford an outboard motor, Hugh Laurie and his poor dear friends are having to propel themselves through the water.

The following year, his last, he could either stay with rowing or return to the Footlights, but he could not do both. President of the Cambridge University Rowing Club, or President of the Cambridge Footlights? He claims that he tossed a coin and it came down Footlights. He had gone to Edinburgh and seen Latin! and decided that perhaps I might be a useful new recruit to his Footlights. Only he and Emma were left from the first year and he needed fresh blood. Kim was co-opted on to the committee as Junior Treasurer, Katie was Secretary, Emma Vice-President and a computer scientist from St John’s called Paul Shearer, a funny, lugubrious performer with eyes almost as big as Hugh’s, was already on board as Club Falconer. This strange office went back to the days when the Footlights were quartered in Falcon Yard. I don’t believe there were any duties attached to being Falconer, but it looked good, and I envied Paul’s title sorely and reprehensibly.





Continuity and Clubroom

There is perhaps one overriding reason why the Footlights has produced such an astonishing number of figures who have gone on to make their mark in the world, and that reason is continuity. The Footlights has a tradition which goes back over a hundred years. That tradition inspires many with a comic itch to choose Cambridge as their university. The Footlights has a regular schedule: a pantomime in the Michaelmas Term, a Late Night Revue at the ADC in the Lent Term and the May Week Revue at the Arts Theatre, which then goes on to tour Oxford and other towns before arriving in Edinburgh for the Fringe Festival in August. And throughout that year are peppered Smokers. The word is an abbreviation of Smoking Concert. I dare say smoking is no longer permitted at these public events, but the name has stayed. In our time Smokers took place in the clubroom. The fact that the club had its own little venue was another of the inestimable advantages held by the Footlights over comedy groups in other universities.

The closest equivalent to a Smoker in the outside world is an open-mike evening I suppose, although in our day there was a small filtration system in place, so ‘open’ isn’t quite the word. Anyone from any college with hopeful sketches, quickies, songs or monologues would come to the clubroom the day before the Smoker and exhibit their material on the stage. Whichever committee member was running that Smoker would yay or nay them. If a yay, their piece would be added to the running order: the auditions would go on until there was enough there for an evening’s entertainment. The huge advantage of this system was that by the time the May Week Revue came around there was a lot of material to choose from and plenty of performers to pick, all of them having been tried out in front of an audience. In most other universities they don’t have that kind of feeder system. Josh and Mary at Warwick or Sussex might say, ‘Hey, we’re funny, let’s write a show and take it to Edinburgh! We’ll put Nick and Simon and Bernice and Louisa in it, and Baz can write the songs.’ They are probably all very funny and talented people, but they won’t have the year’s worth of practice and experience and the cupboard full of proven material that a Footlights show can call upon. That in essence, I believe, is why year after year the club continues to do so well. It is why their tours always sell out and why young people with a feel for comedy are so often disposed to put a tick next to Cambridge in the university application form.

The Footlights clubroom was a long, low room under the Union chamber and had a small stage with a lighting rig and a piano at one end and a sort of bar at the other. All along the walls hung framed posters of past revues and photographs of past Footlighters. In their duffel coats, black polo necks, tweed jackets or wind-cheaters, with studious black-rimmed spectacles perched on their noses and untipped cigarettes between their lips, they all seemed so much older than we were, so much cleverer, so much more talented and a world more sophisticated. They looked more like French left-bank intellectuals or avant-garde jazz musicians than members of a student comedy troupe. Peter Cook, Jonathan Miller, Bill Oddie, Graeme Garden, John Cleese, David Frost, John Bird, John Fortune, Eleanor Bron, Miriam Margolyes, Douglas Adams, Germaine Greer, Clive James, Jonathan Lynn, Tim Brooke-Taylor, Eric Idle, Graham Chapman, Griff Rhys Jones, Clive Anderson …

‘The tradition stops here,’ Hugh and I would mutter as we looked up for inspiration and found our gaze meeting theirs. Such a tradition, such a rich history as the Footlights’, was in part inspiration and encouragement but in part insurmountable obstacle and impossible burden.

Neither Hugh nor I seriously thought for a moment that we would have a career in comedy or drama or any other branch of showbusiness. I would, if I scraped a First in my Finals, probably stay on at Cambridge, prepare a doctoral thesis and see what I could offer the academic world. I hoped, in my innermost secret places, that I might be able to write plays and books on top, under, or to one side of, whatever tenured university post might come my way. Hugh claimed that he had set his eyes on the Hong Kong police force. There had been one or two corruption scandals in the Crown Colony, and I think he rather fancied the image of himself as a kind of Serpico figure in sharply creased white shorts, a lone honest cop doing a dirty, dirty job … Emma, none of us doubted, would go out and achieve her destiny in world stardom. She already had an agent. A forbiddingly impressive figure called Richard Armitage, who drove a Bentley, smoked cigars and sported an old Etonian tie, had signed her on to the books of his company, Noel Gay Artists. He also represented Rowan Atkinson. Emma’s future was certain.

None of which is to say that Hugh and I lacked ambition. We were ambitious in the peculiar negative mode in which we specialized: ambitious not to make fools of ourselves. Ambitious not to be called the worst Footlights show for years. Ambitious not to be mocked or traduced in the college and university newspapers. Ambitious not to look as if we thought ourselves pro-ey showbizzy stars. Ambitious not to fail.

Within two weeks of meeting we finished the Snow Queen script. I also wrote a monologue with Emma for her appearance as a mad, unpleasant and foul-smelling Wise Old Woman. Katie was cast as the heroine, Gerda, while Kim, ascending to the role of Pantomime Dame as if born to it, played her strikingly Les Dawson-like mother. I was a silly-ass Englishman called Montmorency Fotherington-Fitzwell, Ninth Earl of Doubtful, who by happy chance never sang. Australian-born Adam Stone from St Catharine’s played Kay, Gerda’s boyfriend, Annabelle Arden had the title role of the Snow Queen herself and an extremely funny first-year called Paul Simpkin played a kind of dumpling-faced jester. There was a talented young man called Charles Hart, whom we put in the chorus. He later came to fame and frankly not inconsiderable fortune as the lyricist for Andrew Lloyd-Webber’s Phantom of the Opera and Aspects of Love. Greg Snow, a howlingly funny friend from Corpus Christi, was in the chorus too, alternately amusing and exasperating Hugh with his astounding camp and a talent for bitchery that approached high art.

Hugh had a hand in the music, and I had a finger or two in the lyrics but most of the composition and arrangements were the work of an undergraduate called Steve Edis, whose girlfriend, Cathie Bell, danced and sang in the chorus like a demented can-can girl, despite her devastating susceptibility to severe asthma attacks.



The Snow Queen, 1980. My first Footlights appearance.





The pantomime seemed to go well, and by the time the Lent term came Hugh and I were already starting to write material for the Late Night Review, to which Hugh had given the title Memoirs of a Fox. It irked him that no one seemed to get the reference, but it was a fine enough title without having to know Siegfried Sassoon. Titles, you soon discover, are fantastically irrelevant. You could call it, as American Indians were said to do of their babies, the first thing you see out of the window: Running Bull, Long Cloud or Parked Cars. You could even call it ‘The First Thing You See Out of the Window’. Actually, I quite like that. One afternoon I found a tattered old exercise book in the Footlights Clubroom. Scrawled on the cover were the words: ‘May Week Revue Title Suggestions’. Over generations members had written down ideas for titles for shows. My favourite was Captain Fellatio Hornblower. I always suspected this to be the handiwork of a young Eric Idle. Many years later I asked him; he had no memory of it but agreed that it sounded pretty much his style and was willing to take the credit especially if there was a royalty in it for him.

More or less opposite Caius College stood a restaurant called the Whim. For generations this friendly, un-pretentious establishment had been a favourite student haunt for good cheap suppers and long, lazy Sunday brunches. One day, quite unexpectedly, it closed down and covered itself in scaffolding. Two weeks later it reopened as something I had never seen or experienced before: a fast-food burger bar. Still called the Whim, it was now the home of the new Whimbo Burger, two beef patties smothered in a slightly tangy, slightly sweet creamy sauce, topped with slices of gherkin, slapped into a triple decking of sesame seed bunnage and presented on a styrofoam tray to the accompaniment of chips called ‘fries’ and whipped-up ice-cream called ‘milkshakes’. The tills had pre-set buttons on them that allowed the perkily paper-capped assistants to press a button for Whimbo, say, and another for milkshake or fries, and all the prices would be automatically registered and calculated. It was like entering an alien space-ship, and I am sorry to say that I loved it to distraction.

A ritual was established. Hugh, Katie, Kim and I, after spending much of the afternoon in A2 playing chess, talking and smoking, would leave Queens’, walk along King’s Parade to Trinity Street and into the Whim, then on to the Footlights clubroom, cheerfully swinging our catch, two carrier bags crammed with steaming Whimmery. I could happily manage two Whimbos, a regular order of fries and a banana milkshake. Hugh’s standard intake was three Whimbos, two large orders of fries, a chocolate milkshake and whatever Katie and Kim, who were more delicate, had failed to finish. His years of rowing and the enormously high calorific output they had demanded of him had given Hugh a colossal appetite and a speed of ingestion that to this day stagger all who witness them. I do not exaggerate when I say that he can eat a whole 24-ounce steak in the time it would take me, a much faster than average eater myself, to cut and swallow two mouthfuls. When he returned from his daily river work during his Boat Race year, Katie would cook just for him a cottage pie to a recipe for six people on which she would place four fried eggs. He would polish this off before she had a chance to make a dent in her own soup and salad.

I was rather fascinated by the levels of fitness Hugh had attained for the Boat Race. It is much, much longer than a standard regatta course and requires enormous stamina, strength and will to complete.

‘At least while you were regularly rehearsing for it,’ I remember saying to him once, ‘you must have gloried in the feeling of being so fit.’

‘Mm,’ said Hugh, ‘pausing only to point out that we prefer the word “training” to “rehearsing”, I have to tell you that the fact is you never really feel fit at all. You train so hard you are constantly in a dopey state of numb torpor. On the river you slap and sting yourself into action and heave to, but when that’s over you’re torpid again. In fact the whole thing’s pointless bloody agony.’

‘Which is why,’ I said, ‘it is best left to convicts and galley slaves.’

For all that, how proud I would be if I had ever done something so extraordinarily demanding, so appallingly hard, so wildly extreme as train and row in the Boat Race.

In the clubroom, after the last traces of Whimbo and milkshake had been dealt with, Hugh would play at the piano, and I would watch him, with a further mixture of admiration and envy. He is one of those people with the kind of faultless ear for music that allows him to play anything, fully and properly harmonized, without sight of a score. In fact he cannot really read music. The guitar, the piano, the mouth organ, the saxophone, the drums – I have heard him play them all and I have heard him singing with a blues voice that I would sacrifice my legs to have. It ought to be most annoying, but in fact I am insanely proud.

It is a matter of extreme good fortune that, handsome as Hugh is, prodigiously gifted as he is, funny and charming and clever as he is, I have never felt an erotic stirring for him. How catastrophic, how painfully embarrassing that would have been, how disastrous for my happiness, his comfort and any future we might have had together as comedy collaborators. Instead our instant regard and liking for each other developed into a deep, rich and perfect mutual love that the past thirty years has only strengthened. The best and wisest man I have ever known, as Watson writes of Holmes. I shall stop before I get all teary and stupid.



Hugh in Crete. We rented a villa for the purposes of writing comedy.



A cretin in a Cretan setting.



Hugh prepares to demolish me at backgammon. The retsina was satisfyingly disgusting.





Comedy Credits

In the clubroom I ran my first Smoker, furiously writing much of the material for it myself, terrified that the evening would run short. The Anthony Blunt Cambridge Spies scandal was still being talked of at the time so amongst other pieces I wrote a sketch about a don, me, recruiting an undergraduate, Kim, for the secret service. I also wrote a series of quickies, mostly in the form of physical sight gags. Everything seemed to go magically well that night, and I was deliciously pleased and filled with a powerful new sense of confidence, as if I had discovered a whole new set of muscles I never knew I had.

A few days later I received a letter in the post from an assistant on the BBC’s successful new sketch show Not the Nine O’Clock News, which was in the process of making household names of Rowan Atkinson and his co-stars. One of the show’s producers, an ex-Footlighter called John Lloyd, had been in the audience of my Smoker and seen a quickie which he thought would work well on Not. Could they buy it?

In a fever of excitement I typed it out:


A man finishes a pee in a urinal. He goes to the sink, washes himself and looks for a towel. There isn’t one. He looks for anything he might dry his hands on. Nothing. He sees a man standing by the wall. He approaches him and knees him in the groin. The man doubles up with a huge exhalation of pain in the hot blast of which our hero happily dries his hands.


Yes, I know. On paper it is pretty lame, but it had worked OK that evening in front of the Smoker audience and it worked OK when Mel Smith and Griff Rhys Jones performed it on Not the Nine O’Clock News a month or so later. Over the years it was repeated many times and included in various Best Of compilations. I got used to receiving, right up to the end of the decade, cheques from the BBC for randomly absurd sums. ‘Pay Stephen Fry the sum of £1.07’ and so on. The lowest was 14 pence, for sales to Romania and Bulgaria.

Just after I had sent off that written version of the quickie Hugh arrived in A2 for his usual chess, chat and coffee. I proudly told him the news that I was now a television writer. His face fell.

‘Well, that means we can’t do it now,’ he said, his eyes supplying the phrase that his mouth was too polite to add: ‘You daft tit.’

‘Oh. Oh I hadn’t thought of that. Of course. Damn. Bother. Arse.’

I had been so excited about selling material to television that it had never occurred to me that it meant we would now not be able to use it ourselves. Not thinking is one of the things I’m best at. All the same, when I saw my name included in the end credits of the episode in which my quickie appeared I did feel huggingly happy.

When the time came for the Late Night Memoirs of a Fox to go on at the ADC, Emma, Kim, Paul, Hugh and I were in the show and Hugh added to the cast a tall, blonde, slender and extraordinarily talented girl called Tilda Swinton. She was not a part of Cambridge’s comedy world, such as it was, but she was a magnificent actress, and her poise and presence made her the perfect judge in an American-courtroom sketch that Hugh had devised with some very slight assistance from me.

It is rather perfect to think of the pair of them playing American characters as students on the stage of the ADC. We would have called you mad if you had suggested that one day Hugh would go on to win Golden Globes for playing an American in a television series and that Tilda would win an Oscar for playing an American in a feature film.





Cooke

The previous term Jo Wade, who was Secretary of the Mummers, had drawn my attention to the fact that the Lent term would see the fiftieth anniversary of the club, which had been founded in 1931 by a young Alistair Cooke.

‘We should have a party,’ said Jo. ‘And we should invite him.’

Alistair Cooke was known for his thirteen-part documentary and book, A Personal History of the United States, and his long-running and greatly loved radio series, Letter From America. We wrote to him care of the BBC, New York City, USA, wondering if he had any plans to be in Britain in the next few months and if so whether he might be amenable to being persuaded to be our guest of honour at a dinner for the semi-centennial celebrations of the drama club he may remember founding. A drama club, we added, that was stronger and healthier than ever, having picked up more Fringe Firsts in Edinburgh than any other university drama society in the land.

He wrote back with the news that he had no plans to be in Britain. ‘However, plans can be changed. Your letter has so delighted me that I shall fly myself over to be with you.’

In the dining hall of Trinity Hall he sat between me and Jo and talked wonderfully of his time at Jesus College in the late twenties and early thirties. He spoke of Jacob Bronowski, who had the rooms above him: ‘He invited me to a game of chess and as we sat down asked me, “Do you play classical chess or hypermodern?”’ He spoke of his friendship with Michael Redgrave, who succeeded Cooke as editor of Granta, Cambridge’s most intelligent student publication. As he spoke, he noted down a few words on his napkin. When it was time to propose the toast to Mummers and its next fifty years, he rose to his feet and, on the basis of those three or four scribbled words, delivered a thirty-five-minute speech in perfect Letter From America style.


Michael Redgrave and I were most annoyed that women were not allowed to act in plays in Cambridge. We were tired of those pretty Etonians from King’s playing Ophelia. We thought the time had come to change all that. I went to the Mistresses of Girton and Newnham and proposed the formation of a serious new drama club in which women might be allowed to take on women’s roles. The Mistress of Girton was P. G. Wodehouse’s aunt, or cousin or something, I seem to remember, and she was terrifying but kind. Once she and the Newnham Mistress had satisfied themselves that our motives were pure, aesthetic and honourable, which of course they only partly were, they consented to allow their undergraduates to appear in drama, and that is how the Mummers came about. Once the word got out that there was a new club which allowed women to act, hundreds of male undergraduates besieged me, begging to be cast in our first production. I remember holding auditions. One undergraduate from Peterhouse came to see me and recited a speech from Julius Caesar. ‘Tell me,’ I said to him as kindly as I could, ‘what subject are you reading?’ ‘Architecture,’ he replied. ‘Well, you carry on with that,’ I said, ‘I’m sure you’ll be an excellent architect.’ He did indeed get a First in Architecture, but whenever I see James Mason now he says to me, ‘Damn. I should have taken your advice and stayed with architecture.’


The fluency, charm and ease with which Cooke spoke held the entire hall completely spellbound. He was one of those people who seemed to have been born to bear witness. Famously he had been in the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles in 1968, only yards from Robert F. Kennedy when he was shot down and killed. He told us a story of another brush with political destiny that had taken place during the long vac that followed his setting up of the Mummers.


I went with a friend on a walking tour of Germany. It was the kind of thing one did then. Books strapped up in an arrangement of leather belts and slung over the shoulder as one tramped the meadows of Franconia, stopping off at taverns and guesthouses. We arrived in a small Bavarian valley late one morning and found a perfect beer garden, overlooked by a pretty old inn which tumbled with geraniums and lobelias. As we sat sipping our Steins of lager, chairs were being arranged in rows in the garden. It seemed that some sort of concert was in the offing. By and by two ambulances drew up. The drivers and stretcher-bearers got out, yawned, lit cigarettes and stood by the open tailgates of their vehicles as if it were the most normal thing in the world. People began to arrive, and soon every chair in the beer garden was taken and the dozens who couldn’t get a seat stood at the back or sat cross-legged on the grass in front of the small temporary stage. We simply could not imagine what was going to happen. An enthusiastic crowd, but no musicians and, most strangely of all, those ambulance drivers and stretcher-bearers. At last a pair of huge open-topped Mercedes tourers arrived, crammed like a Keystone Kop car with more uniformed figures than they could comfortably hold. They all leapt out, and one of them, a short man in a long leather coat, marched to the stage and began to speak. Not speaking German at all well, I could not understand much of what he said, but I could make out the repeated phrase “Fünf Minuten bis Mitternacht! Fünf Minuten bis Mitternacht! Five minutes to midnight! Five minutes to midnight!” It was all most strange. Before long, women in the crowd would swoon and faint, and the stretcher-bearers would start forward to collect them. What kind of speaker was it who could be so guaranteed to cause people to faint with his words that ambulances came along beforehand? When the man had finished speaking he strode up the aisle, and his elbow barged against my shoulder as I leant out to see him go, and he backed into me, turned away as he was to take the ovation of the crowd. He immediately grabbed my shoulder to stop me from falling, ‘Entschuldigen Sie, mein Herr!’ he said. ‘Excuse me, sir!’ For some years afterwards, whenever he came on in the cinema newsreels as his fame spread, I would say to the girl next to me. ‘Hitler once apologized to me and called me sir.’


When the evening was over Alistair Cooke shook my hand goodbye and held it firmly, saying, ‘This hand you are shaking once shook the hand of Bertrand Russell.’

‘Wow!’ I said, duly impressed.

‘No, no,’ said Cooke. ‘It goes further than that. Bertrand Russell knew Robert Browning. Bertrand Russell’s aunt danced with Napoleon. That’s how close we all are to history. Just a few handshakes away. Never forget that.’

As he left he tucked an envelope in my pocket. It was a cheque for £2,000 made out to the Cambridge Mummers. On a compliment slip with it he had written, ‘A small proportion to be spent on production, the rest for wine and senseless riot.’





Chariots 2

One morning in February Hugh came into A2, waving a letter.

‘You were in that film they made here, weren’t you?’ he said to me and Kim.

‘Chariots of Fire, you mean?’

‘Well they’ve got some sort of premiere at the end of March and a party at the Dorchester Hotel and they want the Footlights to be the entertainment. What do you think?’

‘It would make sense if we could actually see the film first. So we could do a sketch about it, or at least make some kind of reference?’

Hugh consulted the letter. ‘They’re suggesting we go to London on the morning of the thirtieth, go to the screening for film critics that’s taking place in the afternoon, rehearse in the hotel ballroom and then we’ll be put on after the dinner.’

The day before taking the train to London I called my mother to tell her what we were up to.

‘Oh, the Dorchester,’ she said. ‘I haven’t been to the Dorchester for years. In fact, I remember the last time clearly. Your father and I went to a ball and it broke up early because the news of John F. Kennedy’s assassination came through, and nobody felt like carrying on.’

On the appointed day the core Footlights team settled down in an empty cinema for the screening of the film, quite expecting to be depressed by a low-budget British embarrassment. As we came out, I brushed a tear from my cheek and said, ‘Either I’m in a really odd mood or that was rather fantastic.’

Everybody else seemed to be in agreement.

We hastily put together an opening sketch in which we ran on to the stage in slow motion. Steve Edis, whose ear was every bit as good as Hugh’s, had absorbed Vangelis’s distinctive musical theme and reproduced it on the piano.

After hanging about for hours in a small dining area set aside for toast masters in red mess jackets and what used to be called the upper servants, we were at last on.

‘My lords, ladies and gentlemen,’ said the MC into his microphone, ‘they twinkled in the twenties and now they’re entertaining in the eighties. It’s the Cambridge University Footlights!’

Our slo-mo running on stage to Steve’s lusty rendition of the film score went extremely well, and from the opening explosions of laughter and applause we settled confidently into our material. At some stage however it became apparent that we were losing the audience. There was rustling, murmuring, chair scraping and whispering. Dinner-jacketed men and evening-gowned women were scampering towards the back of the ballroom and … well, quite frankly … leaving.

Surely we weren’t that bad? We had not only performed this in Cambridge but we had done evenings at the Riverside Studios in Hammersmith. I was prepared to believe that we might not be to everyone’s taste, but such a mass walk-out seemed like a studied insult. I caught Hugh’s eye, which held the wild, rolling look of a gazelle being pulled to earth by a leopard. I dare say my expression was much the same.

As we lumbered sweatily off stage, with Paul going forward for his monologue with the brave tread of an aristocrat approaching the guillotine, Emma whispered to us, ‘Someone’s shot Ronald Reagan!’

‘What?’

‘All the Twentieth Century Fox executives have left and gone to the phones …’

I rang my mother that night.

‘Well that’s settled then, darling,’ she said. ‘No member of this family ever goes to an event at the Dorchester again. It’s not fair on America.’





Corpsing Chorus

Back in Cambridge, Brigid Larmour was directing the Marlowe Society production that term, Love’s Labour’s Lost. This was the straight drama equivalent of the Footlights May Week Revue, a big-budget (by any standards) production mounted in the Arts Theatre, a splendid professional theatre with an alarming audience capacity of exactly 666. A combination of my persuasive rhetoric and Brigid’s natural charm succeeded in securing Hugh for his first Shakespearean role, that of the King of Navarre. I played the character with perhaps the best description in all of Shakespeare’s dramatis personae: ‘Don Adriano de Armado, a fantastical Spaniard’. Only I wasn’t a fantastical Spaniard. For some reason, whenever I attempt Spanish it comes out as Russian or Italian, or a bastard hybrid of the two. I can manage a Mexican accent acceptably, so my Armado was an inexplicably fantastical Mexican. The major role of Berowne was played by a fine second-year actor called Paul Schlesinger, nephew of the great film director John Schlesinger.

The play opens with a long speech from the King in which he announces that he and the leading members of his court shall forswear the company of women for three years, dedicating themselves to art and scholarship. Hugh and Paul had one of those uncontrollable laughing problems. They only had to catch each other’s eye on stage and they would be unable to breathe or speak. For the first few rehearsals this was fine, but after a while I could see Brigid beginning to worry. By the time it came to the dress rehearsal it was apparent that Hugh would simply not be able to get out the words of the opening address unless either Paul was off stage, which made a nonsense of the plot, or some imaginative solution to the problem could be found. Threats and imprecations had proved useless.

‘I’m sorry,’ each said. ‘We’re trying not to laugh, it’s a chemical thing. Like an allergy.’

Brigid hit upon the happy notion of making everyone on stage in that scene, the King, Berowne, Dumain, Longaville and general court attendants, speak the opening lines together as a kind of chorus. Somehow this worked, and the giggling stopped.

At the first-night party I heard a senior academic and distinguished Shakespeare scholar congratulate Brigid on her idea of presenting the introductory speech as a kind of communal oath. ‘A superb concept. It made the whole scene come alive. Really quite brilliant.’

‘Thank you, Professor,’ said Brigid without a blush, ‘it seemed right.’

She caught my eye and beamed.





Cellar Tapes and Celebration

The last term arrived. Another May Ball. Finals of the English tripos. The May Week Revue itself. Graduation. Farewell, Cambridge, hullo, world.

For the last Footlights Smoker before we began work on the show itself I recruited my old friend Tony Slattery, who fitted in with the greatest ease. He tore up the audience with guitar songs and extraordinary monologues of his own devising; one girl, according to the fatalistic janitor figure who looked after the premises, actually wet herself.

‘There’s such a thing,’ he said as he shook a canister of Vim over the damp cushion, ‘as too funny.’

I attempted to persuade Simon Beale to join us too, but he had enough singing and drama to fill his diary. I think he felt that comedy shows somehow weren’t quite him. With the addition of Penny Dwyer, with whom I had worked in Mummer productions and who could sing, dance, be funny and do just about anything, we had a cast to join me, Hugh, Emma and Paul Shearer for the big one, the May Week Revue that would go on to Oxford and then Edinburgh.

I wrote a monologue for myself based on Bram Stoker’s Dracula and a two-handed parody of The Barretts of Wimpole Street, in which Emma played Elizabeth, a bed-bound invalid, and I played Robert, her ardent suitor. Hugh and I had both seen and found hilarious John Barton’s Shakespeare Masterclasses on television, in which he had painfully slowly taken Ian McKellen and David Suchet through the text of a single speech. We put together a sketch in which I did the same with Hugh. So detailed was the textual analysis that we never got further than the opening word, ‘Time’.

Hugh asked the previous year’s President, Jan Ravens, to direct us, and we began rehearsals in the clubroom. We put together a closing ensemble sketch, in which a ghastly kind of Alan Ayckbourn family playing after-dinner charades breaks down in animosity, revelation and disarray.





Performing the ‘Shakespeare Masterclass’ sketch with Hugh.

At some point we must have sat Finals and at another point I must have completed two dissertations, one on Byron’s Don Juan, another on aspects of E. M. Forster. I can remember neither, having knocked them both up in two frantic evenings: 15,000 words of drivel typed out at high speed.

When the news came that the English results were published I walked to the Senate House, against the walls of which huge notice-boards in wooden frames had been attached. I strained through the crowd of hysterical studentry and found my name in the Upper Second list. I had scored a dull, worthy and unexciting 2:1.

Peter Holland, a don from Trinity Hall who had supervised me for practical criticism and seventeenth-century literature, offered consolation.

‘They reread you for a First twice,’ he said. ‘You came very close. You got good Firsts in all your papers, top in Shakespeare again. But a 2:2 in the Forster dissertation and a Third in the Byron. That’s why they just couldn’t do it. Hard luck.’

The hurt was more to my pride than to my plans. To be honest, Cambridge was right, I had shown I could fly through written exams against the clock, but the serious work of a dissertation, which required the kind of originality, scholarship and diligence that I either didn’t possess or simply couldn’t be arsed to produce, exposed me for the plausible rogue that I was.



With Kim outside the Cambridge Senate House, celebrating our Tripos results. I was insanely in love with that Cerruti tie.

Hugh read Archaeology and Anthropology and got a far more amusing and likeable class of degree. He had been to one lecture, which gave him the material for a quite brilliant monologue about a Bantu hut, but otherwise had not disturbed his professors, written an essay or entered the faculty library. I think he would be the first to admit that you know more about Archaeology and Anthropology than he does.

The first night of our May Week Revue came. The show was called The Cellar Tapes, as much a reference to the underground Footlights clubroom in which it was born as to Bob Dylan’s Basement Tapes or any pun on Sellotape.

Hugh came on stage for the opening. ‘Ah, good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Welcome to the May Week Revue. We have an evening of entertainment, of – I got a Third by the way – sketch comedy, music and …’

We were under way. The Arts Theatre has one of the best auditoriums for comedy I know. Sitting in a spotlight with a leather book on my lap delivering the Dracula monologue, standing on stage with Hugh for the Shakespeare Masterclass, kneeling at the stricken Emma’s bedside, pouring tea for Paul Shearer in the MI5 recruitment sketch – all these moments were more pleasurable and thrilling in this theatre, on this occasion, before such an enthusiastic audience, than anything I had ever done before.

Hugh and I looked at each other after the curtain fell. We knew that, come what might, we had not disgraced the name of Footlights.



The Cellar Tapes closing song. I fear we may have been guilty of embarrassing and sanctimonious ‘satire’ at this point. Hence the joyless expressions.

One night of the two-week run the word went round backstage that Rowan Atkinson had been spotted in the audience. I broke the habit of my (short) lifetime and peeped through at the house. There he was, there could be no mistake. Not the least distinctive set of features on the planet. We all performed with an extra intensity that may have made the show better or may, just as easily, have given it rather a hysterical edge – I for one was too excited to be able to tell. The great Rowan Atkinson watching us perform. Only a year and a half ago I had all but vomited with laughter at his show in Edinburgh. Since then Not the Nine O’Clock News had propelled him to major television stardom.

He came round backstage to shake our hands, a graceful and kindly act for a man so shy and private. My state of electrified enthralment stopped me from hearing a single word he said, although Hugh and the others told me afterwards that he had been charmingly complimentary about the evening.

Two nights later Emma’s agent, Richard Armitage, came.

‘Do you see yourselves,’ he asked us afterwards, ‘doing this kind of thing professionally? As a career?’

It was all so sudden, strange and overwhelming. A few terms earlier I had been happy to wander on as a grizzled soldier or warty old king in productions of Chekhov and Shakespeare. I had listened to the more serious actors talking about applying for places on the Webber Douglas Academy graduate course, the path that Ian McKellen had taken after Cambridge. Since I had met Hugh and started writing sketches with him and on my own I had dared hope that I might perhaps apply one day to BBC radio for a job as a scriptwriter or assistant producer or something along those lines. About my future as a comic performer I was less sure, however. All the facial mastery, double-takes, clowning and fearless assurance that Hugh and Emma displayed on stage and in rehearsal came much less naturally to me. I was voice and words; my face and my body were still a source of shame, insecurity and self-consciousness. That this Richard Armitage was prepared, keen even, to take me on and shepherd me into a genuine career seemed like astonishingly good luck.

I later discovered that, crafty old fox that he was, Richard had sent his youngest client ahead to see us and deliver his opinion. Which explained what Rowan had been doing there. Plainly he had made encouraging enough noises about us for Richard himself to make the journey to Cambridge and, now that he had seen the show for himself, to make this offer.

I accepted, of course. As did Hugh and Paul.

‘Of course,’ Hugh said, walking back from the theatre afterwards, ‘it doesn’t necessarily mean anything. He probably scoops up dozens every year.’

‘I know,’ I said. ‘But still, I’ve got an agent!’

I stopped to break the news to a parking meter. ‘I’ve got an agent!’

The silhouette of King’s College chapel loomed up against the night sky. ‘I’ve got an agent!’ I told it. It was unmoved.





Cheerio, Cambridge

My last May Ball, my last Cherubs Summer Party on the Grove at Queens’. May Week parties all over Cambridge, new levels of drunkenness, mooning, stumbling about, weeping and vomiting. Kim and I threw our own party on the Scholars’ Lawn of St John’s and got through every last case and bottle of Taittinger that Kim’s parents had kindly sent down. My family came to the graduation ceremony: hundreds of identically subfusc graduands-turned-graduates milled about on the lawn outside the Senate House, all looking suddenly rather adult and forlorn as they posed with forced smiles for parental photographs and said their final farewells to three-year friendships. The shadow of the outside world was looming over us all, and that three years seemed suddenly to peel and shrink away like a snake’s sloughed skin, too shrivelled and small ever to have fitted the fine and gleaming years of our ownership.



In room A2, Queens’. Graduation day: posing with sister Jo.

Kim’s parents lived in Manchester but they also had a house in the prosperous London suburb of Hadley Wood, a brisk walk from High Barnet and Cockfosters Tube Stations, and they made this entirely available to Kim and me as soon as we left Cambridge. It was an absurdly wonderful and luxurious introduction to life outside university. On the television there I watched Ian Botham wrench the Ashes from Australia’s grasp and felt like the happiest man in the universe.

Almost immediately The Cellar Tapes was off to Oxford for a week at the Playhouse Theatre. After the pleasures of the Cambridge Arts, the Playhouse, with its long, narrow skittle-alley auditorium appeared wholly inimical to comedy, and our material seemed to us to fall flat. The management and technical staff of the theatre were less than welcoming, and we spent a frightened, unhappy week avoiding the hostile glares of the tab men and lighting crew and alternating between melancholy wails and hysterical laughter as we huddled together for mutual comfort and support. It was a bewildering crash to earth. Hugh was so angered by the staff’s unkindness that he wrote a letter to the manager which he showed me before posting. I had never seen cold fury so expertly rendered into polite but damning prose.

From Oxford we travelled to the theatre at Uppingham School, Chris Richardson welcoming us as two years earlier he had prophesied he would. Oxford had convinced us our show was a shambles and that Edinburgh would be a disaster, but Uppingham rebuilt our morale a little: the staff and school made a supportive and enthusiastic audience and the theatre – on whose boards I had been the very first to step in 1970 as a witch in Macbeth† – was a perfect arena in which to restore our confidence. Christopher was the warmest and most thoughtful host, making sure that we each had excellent accommodation, including a small bottle of malt whisky on the bedside table.

The great William Goldman is famous for saying of Hollywood that ‘nobody knows anything’, an apophthegm that holds just as true in theatre. I received a letter from someone who had been to The Cellar Tapes at the Oxford Playhouse and wanted to tell me that they thought it the best show of its kind they had ever seen. I tried and failed to remember a single moment of the Oxford run that I thought had gone well. I realized, however, if I was honest, that the audience did at least laugh, and there had been sustained and enthusiastic applause at the end. I suppose the rudeness of the theatre staff and the shape of the auditorium had contrasted so negatively with the perfection of Cambridge that the entire experience seemed black and hopeless.





Caledonia 3

Before long we arrived at Edinburgh, where we found ourselves sharing St Mary’s Hall with the Oxford Theatre Group, whose own show was on immediately before ours. They were friendly and self-deprecating and charming. St Mary’s was a large venue with temporary seating banked high. It turned out to be perfect for the show. We received favourable reviews and found ourselves sold out for the two weeks of our run.

We performed two sketches on the radio for a BBC Radio 2 Fringe round-up programme presented by Brian Matthew, who interviewed us afterwards. It was my first time on the radio: performing the sketch was fine, but as soon as I had to speak as myself I found my throat restricted, my mouth dry and my brain empty. This would be the case for years to come. Alone in my bedroom I could say things to an imaginary interviewer that were fluent, amusing and assured. The moment the green recording light was on I froze.

One night Richard Armitage left a note to say that someone from the BBC would be present and would like to see us. Two days later he told us to give some time after the show to two people from Granada Television. The following night Martin Bergman, who had been President of Footlights in ’77–’78 and whom I had seen in Nightcap, came to see the show too. They all had offers that made us dizzy with astonishment.

The man from the BBC asked if we might be willing to record The Cellar Tapes for television. The two from Granada, a florid Scot called Sandy and a pert young Englishman call Jon, wondered if we would be interested in developing a comedy sketch show for them. Martin Bergman told us that he was arranging a tour of Australia. September to December, Perth, Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, Canberra and Brisbane. Did we like the idea?


On the penultimate night of the run, as we were executing our final bows to the audience, their cheering suddenly increased in volume and intensity. This was gratifying but inexplicable. Hugh nudged me; a man had walked on stage from the wings behind us and was coming forward holding his hand up for silence. His presence only encouraged more cheering. It was Rowan Atkinson. For a moment or two I thought he had gone insane. His reputation for timidity was already established. It made no sense whatsoever for him to be here.

‘Um, ladies and gentlemen. Do forgive me for interrupting like this,’ he said. ‘You must think it most odd.’

These innocent remarks elicited greater laughs from the audience than any they had favoured us with all evening. Such is the power of fame, I remember thinking even as I looked on bewildered and intrigued by this peculiar invasion. Of course, Rowan had a way with words like ‘odd’ that did make them very funny.

‘You may know,’ he continued, ‘that this year sees the institution of an award for the best comedy show on the Edinburgh Fringe. It is sponsored by Perrier … the bubbly water people.’

More laughter. No one can say the word ‘bubbly’ quite like Rowan Atkinson. My heart was beginning to hammer by now. Hugh and I exchanged glances. We had heard of the founding of this Perrier Award and of one thing we were absolutely certain …

‘The organizers and judges of the award, which is to encourage new talent and new trends in comedy, were absolutely certain of one thing,’ Rowan continued, echoing our conviction. ‘That whoever won it wouldn’t be the Cambridge bloody Footlights.’

The audience drummed their feet in appreciation, and I began to fear for the safety of the temporary structure supporting them.

‘However, with a mixture of reluctance and admiration, they unanimously decided that the winner had to be The Cellar Tapes …’

The auditorium exploded with applause, and Nica Burns, organizer of the award (after thirty years she still is. Indeed she funded it herself when the sponsorship dried up), stepped forward with the trophy, which Rowan handed to Hugh.



Rowan Atkinson presents Hugh with the Perrier Prize cheque. Edinburgh, 1981.

The Vice-Chancellor placing in my hands a piece of paper that testified to my status as a BA (Hons.) was a small thing compared to this.

We had done it. We had put on a show and we had not disgraced ourselves. Indeed, we seemed to have done better than that.

Later that night, after dinner with Rowan and Nica and the people who looked after Perrier’s PR, we trailed drunkenly home to our digs.

I lay awake almost all the night. I am not romanticizing the moment. I remember how I lay awake and where my thoughts took me.

A year and a half earlier I had been on probation. For almost all of my childhood and youth I had been lost in the dense blackness of an unfriendly forest thick with brambles, treacherous undergrowth and hostile creatures of my own making.

Somewhere, somehow I had seen or been offered a path out and had found myself stumbling into open, sunlit country. That alone would have been pleasure enough after a lifetime’s tripping and tearing myself on ugly roots and cruel thorns, but not only was I in the open, I was on a broad and easy path that seemed to be leading me towards a palace of gold. I had a wonderful, kind and clever partner in love and a wonderful, kind and clever partner in work. The nightmare of the forest seemed a long distance behind me.

I cried and cried until at last I fell asleep.





Comedy



Enough time has passed for the 1980s to have taken on an agreed identity, colour, style and flavour. Sloane Rangers, big hair, Dire Straits, black smoked-glass tables, unstructured jackets, New Romantics, shoulder pads, nouvelle cuisine, Yuppies … we have all seen plenty of television programmes flashing images of all that past our eyes and insisting that this is what the decade meant.

As it happens, resistant to cliché as I try to be, the eighties for me conformed almost exactly to every one of those rather shallow representations. When I was tipped out of Cambridge and into the world in 1981, Ronald Reagan was beginning the sixth month of his presidency, Margaret Thatcher was suffering the indignity of a recession, Brixton and Toxteth were aflame, IRA bombs exploded weekly in London, Bobby Sands was dying on hunger strike, the Liberal and Social Democrat parties had agreed to merge, Arthur Scargill was about to take up the leadership of the National Union of Miners, and Lady Diana Spencer was a month away from marrying the Prince of Wales. None of that seemed especially peculiar at the time, of course, nor did it seem as if one was living a television researcher’s archive package.

I emerged from university a thin, tall, outwardly confident graduate for whom everything seemed new and exciting, if wildly temporary. Sooner or later, I was convinced, I would be found out, and the doors of showbusiness would be slammed in my face, and I should have to set about answering my true vocation as a teacher of some kind. In the meantime I could not deny that it was larky and lovely to be riding this transitory cloud of glory.





Carry on Capering

The Perrier Award resulted in a London run of our Footlights show. Well, let us not overstate the case. ‘London run’ suggests something rather grand: in fact we played as the late-night afterthought in a converted morgue in Hampstead called the New End, postal codes away from the fizzing neon of Shaftesbury Avenue. Not that we were complaining. The New End was to us as exciting as the West End. This small theatre had made its journey from abandoned hospital mortuary to leading fringe venue seven years earlier under the auspices of the excellent and pioneering Buddy Dalton and was as glamorous in our eyes as the London Palladium or the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane.

The Cellar Tapes followed every night for a week the main evening show, Steven Berkoff’s Decadence, which starred Linda Marlowe and of course the brilliant and terrifying actor/author himself. The impossible delight of knowing that Berkoff snuck into our dressing-rooms and stole our cigarettes was almost as thrilling as watching him scrawl ‘cunt cunt cunt cunt cunt’ all over Nicholas de Jong’s Evening Standard review of his play and pin it defiantly to the wall in the theatre lobby. Berkoff had a hard, restless menace that he was to bring to the wider world’s attention two years later when he played Victor Maitland, the cruel coke- and art-dealing villain of Beverly Hills Cop. Given his fearsome reputation it is something of a miracle that such a parcel of poncey Cambridge wags as us got away without verbal, at the very least, assault, but despite his manner Berkoff’s first loyalty is to the theatre and to actors. Even freshly graduated revue artists in tweed jackets are admitted to the pantheon. His ire, aggression and insult are reserved for critics, producers and executives.

After the New End came Australia. In honour of Ian Botham’s epic summer of genius we gave our revue the title Botham, the Musical. It is not often that there is enough British salt or a big enough Australian wound for the one to be rubbed into the other, so it seemed like an appropriate and attention-grabbing name for the show.

Australia in the early eighties was a revelation to me. I had expected a backwater: yellow-cellophaned shop windows displaying orange tank-tops and ten-year-old transistor radios, drunken homophobic, pommy-bashing Ockers, winged-glasses-wearing Edna Everages and a sour atmosphere of cultural cringe, inferiority-complex rodomontade and tall-poppy resentment. Not even the greatest Australophile could deny that those elements did and still do exist, but they were and are by no means predominant. I found Australia to be a country of matchlessly high-quality and low-cost food and wine and vibrating with an optimistic prosperity that contrasted vividly with Britain’s miseries of recession, rioting and IRA bombings. The affluence and confidence astonished me. The bright outdoorsy climate seemed to be echoed in the national mood just as Britain’s grey, chilly pessimism so perfectly matched its relentlessly unappetizing weather. I could not know that Britain’s mood was set to change.

Botham, the Musical opened in Perth, and we worked our way across the continent, spending most of our earnings in restaurants. I learnt in Australia to love crayfish and oysters: oysters raw, oysters Rockefeller, oysters Kilpatrick and oysters Casino. At Doyle’s seafood restaurant, which I still visit whenever I am in Sydney, I discovered barramundi and those strange lobster-like creatures the Moreton Bay and Balmain Bugs. This was also the first time I had ever seen wine sold varietally, where the bottles displayed the name of the grape variety, rather than the château, estate or domain of origin. This is so accepted now as to be unworthy of notice. Only the Old World clings to its Barolo, Bordeaux and Mosel labellings – everywhere else you know from one glance at the bottle that the wine is made of Pinot Noir, Cabernet Sauvignon, Tempranillo or Riesling. Having said which, thirty years later it is clear that easy familiarity with varieties has not entirely penetrated Britain. I saw an edition of The Weakest Link not so long ago where, to the question ‘What are Merlot, Shiraz and Chardonnay?’, the contestant offered the answer ‘Footballers’ wives?’

Perth, Adelaide, Melbourne, Canberra, Sydney, Brisbane, Hobart, Launceston, Burnie and Albury Wodonga were all ticked off the itinerary before it was time to return to a snowy December England. We broke the journey in Singapore, staying for two nights at Raffles Hotel, where we ran out of money.





Clash of Cultures

I am back in London. I ride on the Underground and grip the chromium rail to steady myself. The contrast between my brown hand and the paper-white English ones alongside astonishes me. I am in the Tube travelling to Notting Hill. I am on my way to a meeting at a flat in Pembridge Place that will change my life.

For the most part Australia had seemed to take to our comedy. We were just a band of students playing in smallish venues, and it was neither overwhelming triumph nor humiliating disaster. We were presenting material that was now nearly a year old: the Dracula monologue, the Shakespeare Masterclass, the Robert Browning and Elizabeth Barrett sketch, songs, sketches and quickies that we knew backwards. I remember Martin telling us that we would still be doing them in ten years’ time. I blush to reveal that I performed Dracula for a charity show in Winchester just three months ago, a full twenty-nine years after I wrote it. But if, and it was an if as wide as the distance between Sydney and London, we were to make a professional go of comedy, it would mean writing new material, it would mean attempting to make a mark in a new comedy world.



With Emma in ‘My Darling’ – a Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning sketch.

In 1981 a great schism had apparently started to open up in the jolly world of humorous entertainment. I cannot recall when I first heard the phrase ‘alternative comedy’ but I do clearly remember seeing Alexei Sayle on television during my last year at Cambridge. Reeling and jerking like a puppet, crammed à la Tommy Cooper into a double-breasted suit a size too small, sucking in breath through his teeth, Sayle raged brilliantly about posey middle-class liberals. I subsequently learnt that his best lines were actually from the resolutely middle-class privately educated lawyer and Cambridge Footlights alumnus Clive Anderson, but that is not to take away the impact Sayle had. The tireless and surreal rants, all spat out in a Liverpudlian accent you could grate cheese with, combined with the look of a swarthy silent-movie villain made him funny, frightening and impossible to ignore, a kind of anarcho-syndicalist John Belushi – but Lithuanian, Jewish and rebarbative where Belushi was Albanian, Orthodox and cuddly. When I first met him I was made acutely aware that I represented everything he most despised: public school, Cambridge and, due to that manner that I have never been able to shake off, Establishment. Prejudice and snobbery appear to be considered legitimate in that direction: if I had despised him for being the working-class, state-school son of a communist railway worker, I should have been rightly condemned. In those days you were proud of being working-class and ashamed of being middle-class. I was desperate to be proud of being no class, of being déclassé and déraciné, of being bohemian-class, eternal-student-class, artist-class. I missed all those by a mile and continue to this day to reek more of the Garrick Club than the Groucho Club, but that has never stopped me trying, in my doomed, futile and pointless way, to be free. We all have our strange ways of coping, or failing to cope. Over the years I got on perfectly politely and almost amiably with Alexei and his wife, Linda, but I am afraid I have never really forgiven him for his bullying unkindness and aggression towards Ben Elton. By the end of the decade and throughout the nineties he missed no opportunity to take pot-shots at Ben, unjustly accusing him of being somehow inauthentic, derivative and abjectly unworthy of the label comedian or alternative. Well, all that came later, and I dare say he has calmed down now: the point is that, for a short few years, Sayle stood out as the most visible symbol of this new movement and at the time of our return from Australia the world appeared to belong to him and his cohorts.

I am not by nature a pessimist but I did wonder if the door had closed on types like us. Comedy is, as everyone knows, all about timing, and I feared that in the career sense our comic timing was way off. Not the Nine O’Clock News, with three Oxbridge performers, its ex-Footlights producer John Lloyd and its Oxford chief writer Richard Curtis was surely the last hurrah of our kind. And good riddance, the world was saying. What punk had done for music the alternative comedians were doing for comedy. The classic ‘Ah Perkins, come in, sit down’ comic sketch would be swept away along with the tuck box and the old school tie. This is how it seemed to us in our darker moments. I am now fully aware of a fact that will be obvious to you but of which back then I was only dimly conscious, so easy it is to believe that events, history and circumstances conspire uniquely against one. While we may have feared what we feared you can be sure that squadrons of comedians waiting in the wings had quite contrary anxieties. They looked at a BBC dominated by Oxbridge graduates who all appeared to read the same books and newspapers, talk the same way, refer to the same arcane experiences and share the same tastes. There was no Channel 4 at this point, no cable, no satellite, just BBC1, BBC2, BBC radio. A single ITV channel offered variety shows and the last heroes of the great musical-hall tradition in comedians like Benny Hill, Morecambe and Wise and Tommy Cooper as well as sitcoms that, with the glorious exception of Rising Damp, were unmemorable, unoriginal and uninspiring. If you were from neither an Oxbridge nor a variety background I can quite see how Fortress Broadcasting must have appeared unassailable. From such a point of view Emma, Hugh and I would have looked like pampered noblesse for whom the portcullis was respectfully raised, the banner hoisted and fires lit in the great hall. It is perhaps unseemly to emphasize how far from true we felt this to be, but unseemly emphasis is pardonable. Indeed, at just this time, Margaret Thatcher was making unseemly emphasis her signature oratorical mode, and the decade itself prepared for cheekbones, big hair, shoulder pads, political division and conspicuous consumption all to be emphasized in as unseemly a manner as could be managed. Unseemly emphasis was in the air and nowhere more so than in the comedians muttering and massing outside the castle gates.

Peter Rosengard, a life insurance salesman with a penchant for cigars and Claridge’s breakfasts, had visited the Comedy Store in America and in 1979, together with Don Ward, a comic who specialised in warming up rock and roll crowds, he had launched the London Comedy Store, a small room above a topless bar in Walker’s Court, Soho. Already by 1981 the Comedy Store had come to stand for this whole nouvelle vague in comedy – a movement that coincided with the sharp style of the listings magazine Time Out and its achingly leftist breakaway rival City Limits, a movement that tapped the discontent and desire for difference of a student generation emerging into a recession-hit, Tory-controlled, anxious and angry Britain. Squadrons of young middle-class revolutionaries wore out the grooves of London Calling, talked the talk of gender politics and walked the walk of CND and Rock Against Racism. It is not to be wondered that they were unsatisfied with the comedy of Are You Being Served?, The Russ Abbott Madhouse and Never the Twain.

The house of entertainment was comprised of two families: the traditional, to which Dick Emery, Mike Yarwood, the Two Ronnies, Bruce Forsyth and the above-mentioned immortals Morecambe and Wise, Benny Hill and Tommy Cooper belonged, and the graduate, that dynasty started by Peter Cook, which swelled to its full greatness under Monty Python and was now coming to a full stop, or so we feared, with the Not team of John Lloyd, Rowan Atkinson, Richard Curtis, Mel Smith and Griff Rhys Jones, Oxbridgers all. Was the new comedy represented by Alexei Sayle, Ben Elton, French and Saunders, Rik Mayall, Ade Edmondson, Keith Allen and the many others bubbling under an alternative to the first family or to the second? Well, more to the second in fact, despite the background chatter of the times which made out that it was all a class war. Alexei Sayle went to Chelsea Art College and was the most Pythonesque of all the comedians with his streams of absurdist surreality and deliberately recondite frames of reference. French and Saunders met at drama school. Elton, Edmondson and Mayall had all been students at Manchester University together. The truth is that very few of the first wave of alternative comedians could claim to have got their education from the streets or the school of hard knocks; in fact as an old lag I might be said to be the most real and hard of any of them, a thought preposterous enough to show that the idea of there being a group of working-class comics threatening Castle Poncey was really quite misguided. All the comedians were from the same mix of backgrounds as ever, and there was plenty of old-school silly sketch comedy among the angry edgy stand-up. It is true that there was an alternative audience who were ready for something different, and their demand for the new might be said to have released the energy that was now being called ‘alternative’. Some years later Barry Cryer gave the best definition of alternative comedians I have yet to hear. ‘They’re the same only they don’t play golf.’

If this was the Zeitgeist then it was frankly miraculous that our Cambridge Footlights show had won the Perrier Award and that I was now stepping off a Tube train and looking for that address in Pembridge Place.

I rang the doorbell and was buzzed in to an upstairs flat. Hugh, Emma and Paul Shearer were already present. Jon Plowman, whose flat it was, was busy with coffee cups. He was the pert young Englishman from Granada we had met at Edinburgh. Sandy Ross, the pink-faced producer who had been with him that night, introduced me to a dark-haired spectacled young fellow of earnest aspect.

‘This is Ben Elton, he has just graduated from Manchester.’

Sandy outlined his plan: that those of us assembled should form ourselves into a team of writer–performers and create a new comedy show for Granada Television. We were to write and rehearse here in London and then go up to film and record at the studios in Manchester. Ben was already in the middle of collaborating with his university friend Rik Mayall and Rik’s girlfriend, Lise Mayer, on the writing of a new comedy series for the BBC, a kind of anti-sitcom that had the working title The Young Ones. We, for our part, were also committed to the BBC, not for a series but just to record The Cellar Tapes for a one-off transmission.

The idea behind the new Granada show, Sandy Ross explained, was to combine the traditional world of Cambridge sketch-writing with the anarchic, edgy style (he used those words) of Ben, his confrères and all that they represented. Since there were four of us and only one of him, the plan was to bring in At Least Someone Else of a non-Cambridge flavour. The names Chris Langham, Nick le Prevost and Alfred Molina were floated, and perhaps others that I do not recall. Another girl was also required. For a time there was the possibility that it might be the Scottish poet and playwright Liz Lochhead. She came to a rehearsal, I recall, was clearly not impressed with what she found and declined to be involved. Instead Sandy and Jon found a perky young actress, also Scottish, called Siobhan Redmond. In time most of the men in the production were destined to fall for her, myself included in my own peculiar way.

In the meantime, we were tasked to go forth and write.

As I look back through the years at that period of my life, occluded, discoloured and scratched by time, experience and all the ravages and abuses to which my poor mind and body were since subjected, it all seems so improbable, and for reasons that make no obvious sense, so very, very sad. It was nothing of the kind, of course, it was slightly frightening but deliriously thrilling.

Without ever expressing it in any deliberate or calculated way I think Hugh and I understood that we were some kind of a team. Not a double act, but somehow inevitably and eternally linked. The worry uppermost in my mind, the one that I dared not communicate to Hugh, or Emma or Kim or anyone else, was whether or not I was in any way funny. I think I was confident that I was witty, that I was assured, articulate and verbally dextrous with a pen in my hand or a typewriter keyboard beneath my fingers, but between funny and witty falls the shadow …

I believed that being funny, being able to cause laughter through expression, movement and that mysterious palpable, physical something that is given to some and not to others was a gift similar to athleticism, musicality and sex appeal. In other words it had something to do with a self-confidence with the body that I had never had, a self-confidence that allowed physical relaxation and ease that themselves seemed to generate more self-confidence. This was the source of all my troubles. Fear of the games field, fear of the dance floor, athletic ineptitude, sexual shyness, lack of coordination and grace, hatred of my face and body. This could be traced all the way back to kindergarten Music and Movement classes: ‘Everybody sit down in a circle cross-legged.’ I was not even able to do that, could not so much as sit tailor-fashion without looking a gawky fool. My knees stuck up, and my self-confidence sank.

I had lived twenty years convinced that my body was the enemy and that all I had going for me was my brain, my quickness of tongue and my blithe facility with language, attributes that can cause people to be as much disliked as admired. They were adequate for very particular kinds of comedy performance. Verbally intricate monologues and sketches that I had written myself I could be confident in performing happily. But I lived, as I have already indicated, in dread of double-takes, slow burns, pratfalls and those other apparently essential comic techniques that seemed to me as terrifying, impenetrable and alienating as dance steps or tennis strokes. I know how infantile and silly such fears may sound, but in comedy confidence is paramount. If the performer is unsure then the audience is on edge, and that is enough to strangle laughter before it is born. I saw in Hugh, Emma, Tony and others instinctive physical gifts that I knew I did not share and was sure I could never acquire. Besides which, they could all sing and dance. Who could possibly make a career in showbusiness if they lacked musical ability? All of the greats could sing. Even Peter Cook was more musical than I was. I lay awake at nights convinced that Sandy Ross and Jon Plowman would see my inadequacies at once and quietly drop me from the cast. At best they might ask me to stay on purely as a writer. Perhaps I would not mind that too much, but it would be a humiliation and one that I did not relish. A part of me – I have to confess this, moronic, puerile and cheap as it may sound – really did ache to be a star. I wanted to be famous, admired, stared at, known, applauded and liked.

There, I have said it. It is not the most surprising confession for a performer to make, but it is hardly the done thing to admit to such a shallow ambition. There was no question that Emma would be famous, no question at all. I knew that Hugh would make it too but I worried myself silly that I would be left out, like the last one to be picked to play for the team. Cambridge had shown me that I could make an audience laugh, but I had enjoyed the luxury of making them laugh on my terms. Now that we were in the big wide world, one which was looking towards the punkier end of the comedy spectrum, it seemed inevitable that I would be judged to be the one who didn’t quite have what it took. Perhaps a little writing, perhaps some radio work, but nothing like the stardom that beckoned for Hugh and Emma and for Ben Elton’s friend, about whom I was hearing more and more, the astonishing Rik Mayall.

Exactly what I most lacked this explosive comic genius most possessed: physical charisma, devastating self-assurance and an astoundingly natural appeal that radiated out at the audience like a thermonuclear shockwave. He could be silly, charming, childish, vain and inconsequential in a way that simply and unequivocally delighted. You didn’t question it, analyse it, applaud its cleverness, appreciate its social meaning or admire the work behind it, you simply adored it, as you might any natural phenomenon. Whatever gifts I possessed appeared shrivelled, pale and underdeveloped. In the comedy shower-comparison test I failed, and it hurt. Was being in the adult world like being back at school all over again? It seemed loweringly likely.

Meanwhile, I could at least throw myself into the last hurrah of the Cambridge Footlights.


Hugh, Emma, Tony, Paul, Penny and I arrived at the BBC for the televising of The Cellar Tapes at exactly the time Ben Elton, Lise Mayer and Rik Mayall were putting the finishing touches to the Young Ones scripts and Peter Richardson, Ade Edmondson, Rik, Dawn French, Jenny Saunders and Robbie Coltrane were preparing to shoot the Comic Strip film Five Go Mad in Dorset. It is hardly surprising that we felt a little like the New Seekers sharing the bill with the Sex Pistols.

We moved deeper into the realms of the truly old-fashioned when we met the producer whom the BBC had allocated us. He was a thin, jerky man in his mid to late fifties who smelt strongly of whisky and unfiltered Senior Service cigarettes. Which is hardly surprising since he had no other diet. When he introduced himself, something in his name rang a distant muffled bell.

‘How do you do? Dennis Main Wilson.’

Dennis Main Wilson – why was that so familiar? Dennis Main Wilson. It sounded so right. Like Chorlton-cum-Hardy, Amy Semple McPherson, Ella Wheeler Wilcox or Ortega y Gasset, one of those triple names that tripped off the tongue as if one had always known them, while in truth one is never quite sure to whom or what they might refer.

Dennis Main Wilson was in fact the greatest comedy producer of his generation, perhaps of any generation. On the radio he had produced the first two series of The Goon Show and the first four series of Hancock’s Half Hour: for those alone his grave should for ever be festooned with flowers and his memory eternally cherished. On television he was responsible for bringing us The Rag Trade, Till Death Us Do Part, Marty with the great Marty Feldman and Sykes with the equally great Eric Sykes. Perhaps most crucially of all in terms of television history, he demonstrated a patience and openness to new ideas rare in grand and established programme-makers when he agreed one day to read a script presented to him by a lowly BBC scene-shifter. Most senior broadcasting staff can always find a way to avoid unsolicited material. Dennis was made of kindlier stuff and accepted the shyly proffered sheaf of manuscript with the beaming enthusiasm that always characterized him. The scene-shifter’s name was John Sullivan, and his script was called Citizen Smith. It was produced with great success and launched the career of Robert Lindsay. Sullivan followed it up with Only Fools and Horses, which I think one may safely call the most popular comedy in British history.

Spike Milligan, on account of Dennis’s predilection for alcohol, had nicknamed him Dennis Main Drain and there is no question that he was a mockable entity. His tweed jacket, Brylcreemed hair, scrawny neck and nicotine-stained fingers belonged to another age, an age far removed from the excitements of alternative comedy and youth entertainment that the soon-to-be-launched Channel 4 was preparing to offer the world. As a devotee of radio comedy I would have admired him whatever his character; as it is I adored him. We all did. Cautiously at first and then with gathering conviction. One thing, however, we soon discovered was essential when it came to working with Dennis Main Wilson. No matter how much he insisted upon meeting at twelve, one, two, three or four o’clock in the afternoon we had to make equally certain that the meetings should be at nine, ten or eleven in the morning. It was a simple question of productivity. The comedy department at Television Centre was on the sixth floor, with Dennis’s office directly opposite the BBC Club, which was essentially a bar. Every morning at eleven thirty he would make the ten-yard journey from office to Club. A Senior Service unwinding its blue ribbon of smoke from between his fingers, a pint of bitter and a double scotch on the bar in front of him, he would enthral and absorb us with tales of Hattie Jacques, Peter Sellers and Sid James, but as the morning wore on his ability to concentrate on our little show and its looming recording date would become less and less certain, and we would begin nervously to wonder whether there would even be a studio booked, props organized or cameramen available for duty on the appointed night. Catch Dennis at nine in the morning, however, and he was a ball of fire. His fleshless body twitched and jerked, his fingers stabbed the air with each excited new idea, and his chesty, tobacco-enriched chuckle infected us all with grandiose self-belief. He gave us the impression that as far as he was concerned we were cut from the same cloth as Spike Milligan and Tony Hancock. Such attention and respect from one so august could only make us glow. This was perhaps counterbalanced by his complete lack of knowledge or even interest in the new wave lapping up against the ramparts. A small, disloyal, insecure part of me wondered if it wasn’t like, to change the era of the musical comparison, Bobby Darin’s manager assuring him that rock and roll was a temporary blip. Dennis saw us as respectful inheritors of the Golden Age mantle and the new alternative comics as vandals and interlopers who were of no account. I, for such is my way – part greasy sycophant desperate to please, part show-off, part genuine enthusiast – played up to this with endless talk of Mabel Constanduros, Sandy Powell, Gert and Daisy, Mr Flotsam and Mr Jetsam and other music-hall radio stars for whom I had a passion.

We rehearsed in the BBC block popularly known as the North Acton Hilton. Each floor in this dull, impersonal tower tucked away in a dull and impersonal suburb had two sets of purpose-built rehearsal rooms and production offices. Not that I knew it then, but this soulless, sick-building-syndrome structure with its dripping, flaking and crumbling exterior, flickering fluorescent strip-lighting and smelly lifts was to be my second home for the next eight years through successive series of Blackadder and A Bit of Fry and Laurie. I loved it. I loved the canteen, where you could nod hello to Nicholas Lyndhurst and David Jason, the kids from Grange Hill or the dancers from Top of the Pops. I loved the poles on plinths in the rehearsal rooms that could be moved around to stand in for doorways and entrances. I loved the tape on the floor that marked out rooms and camera positions in different colours, like sports-hall courts. I loved looking out across the dreary roofs of west London and knowing that I was here, working for the BBC with All Creatures Great and Small next door and Doctor Who the floor above.

As we rehearsed The Cellar Tapes I had no knowledge of the years and series to come, of course, and no idea that it was quite normal for technical runs to be played out in silence. Let me explain.

Multi-camera studio comedy performed in front of an audience has become rare since single-camera location shooting became the norm some years ago. Back then it was the usual mode. Outside scenes were shot on 16mm film, and everything else on those skirted rostrum studio cameras that wheel around on castors and which inspired Terry Nation to dream up the Daleks. If you watch Fawlty Towers or other comedies of the seventies and early eighties you can see the manifest, almost ludicrous difference between grainy exterior film and shiny interior video. No one seemed to mind then, perhaps because TV reception and resolution were poorer, perhaps because we accepted what we had always been given.

The schedule for recording went like this. You went out into the world and shot the exteriors that your script demanded and then you spent a week in North Acton rehearsing the rest, the studio element. It was traditional to tape the show on a Sunday, I suppose because busy actors often worked in the theatre on other nights. On Friday morning at Acton came the occasion of the Tech Run. The camera and sound crews, set, production, costume and make-up personnel would all troop into the rehearsal room and watch a run-through of the show. And this is where, in March 1982, we received the greatest blow to our comedy egos that we had yet experienced.

Silence.

Silence, the comedian’s enemy.

We ran through sketch after sketch and song after song. Not a smile. Just folded arms, teeth-sucking and the occasional note scribbled on to a Xeroxed copy of the script.

When we had finished the last number and the room began to clear of technical people we went off into a corner and watched in a frightened huddle as the lighting director and number-one cameraman lingered to ask John Kilby, the director, one or two questions. When they had at last gone Dennis bounded up to us.

‘Drink?’

‘Oh, Dennis,’ we said. ‘Is it still going to happen?’

‘What do you mean?’

‘It was a disaster. A complete disaster. Not a smile, not a titter, nothing. They hated us.’

Dennis smiled a long, wide smile and the phlegm in the bottom of his lungs began to hiss, bubble and growl like a coffee-bar milk steamer as he wheezed out a great laugh.

‘They have a job to do, my dears,’ he said. ‘No one, not even the sound crew, was listening. They are looking at where the cameras go, what the edge of frame is, a thousand different things. Ha ha! You thought they were making a judgement. That’s very funny, ha!’ Dennis’s eyes ran as he laughed and choked and gasped to the bottom of his lungs.

On Sunday we performed the show in front of an audience. An audience that was warmed up by Clive Anderson, an ex-Footlights barrister who had yet to make the decision to become a performer in front of the cameras. The recording seemed to go well, but we were not making it for the studio audience, we were making it for television viewers, and whether they would like it we would not know for months.

In the meantime the Granada show demanded our attention.





Chelsea, Coleherne Clones and Conscience

Kim and I moved from Hadley Wood into a flat in Draycott Place, just off Sloane Square in Chelsea, where the newly enroyaled Lady Diana’s friends flitted between the Peter Jones department store, the General Trading Company and Partridge’s delicatessen, all rigged out in identical green quilted Husky jackets and high Laura Ashley collars. Their boyfriends drove Golf GTi cabriolets, so prevalent in SW3 that they were nicknamed haemorrhoids (‘sooner or later every arsehole gets one’). Hooray Henries were getting proudly and hog-whimperingly drunk in the newly fashionable wine bars while their younger brothers wound silk scarves about their long pale necks and drooped like lilies, hoping to look as winning and doomed as Anthony Andrews in Brideshead Revisited. Pubs were beginning to ding and thrum to the sound of Space Invaders and from the open doors of the hairdressing salons and into the tumult of the King’s Road pumped the sound of Adam and the Ants’ ‘Goody Two Shoes’, Dexy’s Midnight Runners’ ‘Come On Eileen’ and Culture Club’s ‘Do You Really Want to Hurt Me?’ Someone had found the knob marked ‘eighties’ and turned it up full.

Just around the corner from Draycott Place in Tryon Street stood, and still stands, a safe, twee and very Chelsea gay pub called the Queen’s Head. It was in the snug there that I first heard about something called GRID. Gay-Related Immune Deficiency. It all sounded most peculiar. Gay people in America were dying and ‘you mark my words, dear,’ said the barman, ‘it’s coming over here.’

The gay world was expressing itself fiercely and freely at this time. Larry Kramer’s Faggots was the book of the age, portraying a world of Fire Island excess where happy hedonists frothed, creamed and pumped away their endless weekends of drug-driven partying, succumbing (and indeed sucking cum) to intense physical gratification in eye-popping scenes of pitiless, guiltless detail. A lifestyle free from moral, personal or medical consequences. No restraint was shown, except perhaps a leather one swinging from the ceiling in which unimaginable acts would be perpetrated. I found it all about as arousing as a Tupperware party. It was a strange feeling to be in a minority within a minority. Most gay people aspired, or appeared to aspire, to that whole scene and to the Village People character types that defined it, especially the plaid-shirted, moustachioed look that was called the Clone. Squadrons of these tight-jeaned, heavy-booted individuals could be seen massed inside the Coleherne Arms in Earls Court. I found the manliness, humourlessness and physical urgency that emanated like cheap musk from such people and places alarming and depressing. Not that I was even faintly drawn to these preposterous Tom of Finland caricatures with their muscle vests, leather caps and joyless stares. My dream partner was a friendly, dreamy, funny young man with whom I could walk, talk, laugh, cuddle and play. Nonetheless I did go to places like the Coleherne and the newly opened Heaven, which proclaimed itself to be the largest disco in Europe. I went because … well, because it was what you did in those days if you were gay and in your twenties. To feel a hundred eyes instantly scan and dismiss me was humiliating and shaming and reminded me of being checked out in the school showers. Rejection, contempt and lack of interest were all instant, careless and unequivocal. Thumping music, the sniffing of poppers, the thrashing on the dance-floor and those endless raking, questing, needy eyes prohibited any conversation or laughter. I was completely uninterested in picking anyone up or in being picked up myself and I certainly had no desire to dance but I suppose I thought that if I went often enough I would somehow break through and start to like it, in the same way I had broken through with unsugared tea. I never did break through with the gay scene. I learned to hate the discos and bars and everything they stood for. I am not sure that I can successfully claim that it was moral repugnance that fuelled my hate, I think it was the remorseless battering to my amour propre, my ego.

Problems with the physical self, you may have noticed by now, are central to my life story. The reckless feeding of my physical appetites on the one hand and the miserable dislike and fear of my physical appearance on the other have all been overseen by a pathological personal theology that has for most of my life robbed me of any true ease. I do not wish to sound self-pitying or to privilege myself with unique sensitivity or susceptibility to distress in these matters, but there is almost no moment in the day when I do not feel myself to be intensely guilty of numberless trespasses. Drinking too much coffee, not concentrating sufficiently hard, not answering emails quickly enough. Not being in touch with people I have promised to be in touch with. Going to the gym too infrequently. Eating too much. Drinking too much. Declining invitations to speak at charity dinners. Being slow in reading and commenting on entirely unsolicited scripts. These are almost meaningless offences; they are pathetic little particles of plankton in the deep ocean of sin to be sure, but my feelings are as craven, cringing and confessional as the most self-abasing Calvinists in their most prostrate and abject furies of repentance. I do not believe there is a god or a judgement day or a redeeming saviour, but I go through all the shame, trembling and self-castigation of the most pious and hysterical ascetic without the cheap promise of forgiveness and a divine cuddle in recompense.

Good gracious, I know how this reads. To listen to the neuroses of a spoilt, over-paid, over-praised, over-pampered celebrity must be unendurable. For me to wallow in the luxury of being worried only by such insignificant piffle while so many in the world suffer the traumas, terrors and torments of poverty, hunger, disease and war. Even here in the developed world there are plenty who have financial and familial worries enough to be – to say the least – unsympathetic to my plight. I know. My God, do you think I do not know how monstrously self-indulgent, narcissistic and childish I must sound in so many ears? That is the point. My real dissatisfaction is with my dissatisfaction. How dare I be so discontent? How dare I? Or being discontent why cannot I shut up about it?

I know that money, power, prestige and fame do not bring happiness. If history teaches us anything it teaches us that. You know it. Everybody agrees this to be a manifest truth so self-evident as to need no repetition. What is strange to me is that, despite the fact that the world knows this, it does not want to know it and it chooses almost always to behave as if it were not true. It does not suit the world to hear that people who are leading a high life, an enviable life, a privileged life are as miserable most days as anybody else, despite the fact that it must be obvious they would be – given that we are all agreed that money and fame do not bring happiness. Instead the world would prefer to enjoy the idea, against what it knows to be true, that wealth and fame do in fact insulate and protect against misery and it would rather we shut up if we are planning to indicate otherwise. And I am all for that. For the greater part of the time I will smile and agree that I am the luckiest devil alive and that I am as happy as a bee in pollen. Most of the time. But not when writing a book like this. Not when it is understood that I will attempt to be as honest with you as possible. About other people, as I have said, I may palter and pretend, but the business of autobiography is at least to strive for some element of self-revelation and candour. And so I have to confess that, foolish as I know it sounds, I spend much of my life imprisoned by a ruthless, unreasoning conscience that tortures me and denies me happiness. How much is Conscience and how much is Cyclothymia, the particular flavour of bipolarity with which I have been diagnosed and to which we will (hurray!) not return in this book, I cannot tell. I am content to shuttle between all available moral, psychological, mythical, spiritual, neural, hormonal, genetic, dietary and environmental explanations for unhappiness.

I hope then that you will excuse the unstartling revelation that I am often tortured and unhappy. Most of this unhappiness would appear to derive from my physical self being either disgusting in its lack of appeal or demanding in its requirements of calories and other damaging substances. In the light of this I will pursue further the point I was making about the Coleherne and related horrors of the eighties scene.

The gay identity, if I can be excused for so squirm-worthy a phrase, drew attention to the physical in those days more than I think it does now. Heaven (both of them: the address in the clouds and the club under the arches of Charing Cross) knows there is still plenty of body fascism about today, but I think it is being accurate rather than charitable to say that the community has grown up a little. Being gay thirty years ago, however, seemed overwhelmingly to be about dancing, cruising, narcissism and anonymous sex. I was gay and therefore I was supposed to care for and be capable of those things too. My problem was twofold. Firstly nobody seemed to be remotely attracted to me, and secondly I wasn’t even interested anyway in all this heavy dance-floor heaving and casual erotic encountering.

Would it have been different if some of those harsh nighthawk glares had melted with desire when I came in through the door? Might I then have consented to dance the sexual dance? Did I hate my own face and body with such a hot hate only because I thought others did? Was I really doing no more than getting my retaliation in first, like children who decide that chess or history or tennis are boring, but only because they don’t have an instant aptitude?

Blaise Pascal said that if Cleopatra’s nose had been a little shorter, the whole history of the earth would have been different. If mine had been a little cuter then maybe I would have thrown myself into a life of carnal abandon at just that period in history when there were trillions of microscopic reasons for that being the most fatal game to play. So perhaps it is as well that I was unappealing.

If you are distressed or irritated to read me describe myself as such, then let it be understood that, while at that time I had no confidence in being anything else, I am fully aware that plenty of undeniably less good-looking men seemed to be getting all the sex they required. Self-image was a lot to do with it, but there can be no disputing the misery caused by those hard eyes running up and down my body for a scorchingly humiliating instant before flicking away with contempt towards the next person coming through the door. Of course I know those glaring gazing gays were just as, perhaps even more, insecure than me. They too were getting their retaliation in first. But to think such unsmiling coldness is sexy … I am very proud and very happy to be gay, but I would be lying if I did not say that much about the world that gay people inhabited in those days sickened, repelled and frightened me.

As much as anything it was to be dismissed without being known that prickled so fiercely. Without labouring the point, it was behaviour that I thought not far from racism, sexism or any other kind of prejudice or snobbery. ‘Because you are not cute I do not want to know you’ was to me hardly different from suggesting, ‘Because you are gay I dislike you’ or ‘Because you are Jewish, I dislike you’ or, come to that, ‘Because you went to Cambridge I dislike you.’ Of course, anyone who believes themselves to be a victim of such discrimination ought to be sure. We first have to dismiss the worrying possibility that a true interpretation of another’s antipathy might be ‘Because you are a boring arsehole I dislike you’, a judgement from which there is little hope of comfortable escape.

Kim enjoyed the gay world more than I did. He was not, of course, fooled by it, but I think he was more at ease in it than I could ever be. He also had more opportunity to experience it, for I was beginning to be so consumed by work that such things as clubs and pubs were receding into the background for me. This new Granada comedy series was going to take me away from London for long periods of time.





Colonel and Coltrane

It was hard not to like Manchester. Being called ‘love’, ‘chuck’ or a ‘daft barmcake’ can only delight a southerner used to the lonely and unsmiling lovelessness of London and the south-east. Granada lodged us at the grand and luxurious Midland Hotel and doled out to us the most unbelievably handsome per diem cash payments in little brown packets. I had never had so much ready money in my life. We had had three months to write material and now we were here to sift, select and record.

Hugh and I had been – what is the word? Horror-struck? Staggered? Mortified? Shamed? Some mixture of all those perhaps – to discover that our slow, mournful and insecure rate of writing had been trumped and trampled on by the one-man whirlwind of industry, creativity and prodigality that was Benjamin Charles Elton. For every one page of uncertain and unfinished sketch comedy that we held apologetically up for judgement, Ben produced fifty. That is no exaggeration. Where our comedy was etiolated, buttoned-up and embarrassed, his was wild, energetic, colourful and confident to the point of cockiness. While we would read ours out with a sorrowful cough and somehow framed in self-deprecating inverted commas, Ben would perform his, playing every part, with undisguised pleasure and demented relish. Despite our complete sense of humiliation and defeat we did laugh and we did unreservedly admire his astonishing talent and the unabashed zest with which he threw himself into performance.

Ben had instantly spotted the performing genius of Emma Thompson and warmed to the big-eyed hopelessness that Hugh could project in characters as well as his authority and range. In me he saw a crusty relict of Empire and created a character called Colonel Sodom, who might, I suppose, be regarded as a rather coarsely sketched forerunner of Blackadder Goes Forth’s General Melchett. Another aspect of my limited performance scope that appealed to him resulted in Doctor de Quincey, a casually peremptory and callous doctor who reappeared some years later in Ben’s comedy drama series Happy Families.

Single-handedly Ben seemed to have written every episode of the series, which was called, after much disputation, There’s Nothing to Worry About. We shot it in and around Manchester, the director, Stuart Orme, using state of the art Electronic News Gathering equipment, which is to say new lightweight video cameras whose flexibility allowed the production to save money on set building, but at the price of a substandard look and soundtrack. Hugh and I managed to write a few sketches that made it through to performance, as a sop to our pride we suspected, one being a long sequence that involved a pair of characters called Alan and Bernard, who had featured in the Footlights Charades sketch and who would pop up again as Gordon and Stewart in A Bit of Fry and Laurie. But all in all it was Ben’s show, for good or ill.

It is no unfair criticism of anyone to say that the results were uneven. Richard Armitage, the agent who had taken me, Hugh and Emma under his wing, was loud in his dismay, disgust and disapproval. He was particularly revolted by Colonel Sodom’s exploding bottom. The Colonel ate strong curries and in a series of shots I was seen striding through the streets of Didsbury all but propelled along the pavement by pyrotechnic special-effect farts. I think there was even a close-up of the seat of my pinstripe trousers bursting open with a smoking star-shaped bang. Richard muttered about this for weeks. He felt that the stylish, intelligent brand of graduate comedy for which he hoped we would be known, and on which he planned to build our careers, was being crippled at birth by a foul-mouthed Cockney street urchin with a sewer for a mind and he wanted none of it. Who knows what grumbling behind-the-scenes machinations took place. Richard may even have tried to get us out of our contract. Steve Morrison, the executive producer, and Sandy Ross stayed loyal to Ben, quite rightly recognizing his ferocious and fertile talent. They were aware nonetheless that There’s Nothing to Worry About had flaws, and their solution was to bring in a new cast member. Paul Shearer, through no fault of his own, left the show. As one who wrote less material even than Hugh and me he was, I suppose, considered dispensable. Paul’s place was taken by a Glasgow Art School graduate called Anthony McMillan, who had just changed his name to Robbie Coltrane.

Big, loud and hilarious, Robbie combined the style and manners of a Brooklyn bus-driver, a fifties rock and roller, a motor mechanic and a Gorbals gangster. Somehow they all fitted together perfectly into one consistent character. He terrified the life out of me, and the only way I could compensate for that was to pretend to find him impossibly attractive and to rub my legs up against him and moan with ecstasy.

‘You cheeky wee fucker,’ he would say and somehow tolerate me.



The only time in my life I ever wore a donkey jacket. Alfresco.



A twat in tweed and cravat: inexcusably slappable. Alfresco.

Robbie has since said in an interview that he found Hugh and me to be arrogant, off-puttingly over-confident Establishment figures who looked down our well-bred noses at his blowsy, vulgar intrusion like thoroughbred racehorses shivering their fastidious flanks at the presence in their stables of an unwelcome donkey. I am not quoting him exactly, but that is certainly the gist of what he said. Whether he made this up to pad out a boring interview session or whether he truly believes it and remembers it that way, I cannot say. I always get on amicably, indeed affectionately, with Robbie on the rare occasions that I see him these days, but I have never dared raise the subject of that interview. They bring us back to the endless, and perhaps arid, problem of affect and appearance, the question of the figures we cut with others despite what we may feel inside. We see everyone else socially armed with great clubs while all we have hidden behind our backs is a pitiful cotton bud. I know how much Hugh and I were suffering a tormented sense of inadequacy, how much we felt out of place and how much we were embarrassed by our damnable public-school and Cambridge backgrounds. I also know that we were too proud and too well-brought-up, or I was certainly, to go around slouching and mooching with hang-dog expressions that begged for petting and pity. It is, at some sort of stretch, possible that we hid our feelings of hopelessness so well that Robbie could, in all conscience, claim that we came over as poncey, preening pricks, but I honestly cannot believe it likely. Perhaps it suited Robbie to imagine himself as a lowborn grease-monkey endowed with natural, home-grown street talent, forced into a world of pale snobbery and mincing middle-class privilege. In fact, of course, Robbie is the son of a doctor and went to school at Glenalmond College, perhaps Scotland’s most elite private seat of learning and subject of the excellent 2008 documentary Pride and Privilege. The 13th Duke of Argyll, the Marquess of Lothian, Prince Georg Friedrich of Prussia and the 9th Earl of Elgin, Viceroy of India, are numbered amongst its eximious alumni. That he managed to enter Glasgow School of Art as Anthony Robert McMillan with an accent like Prince Charles’s and emerge the other end as Robbie Coltrane with an accent like Jimmy Boyle’s is a fine achievement. I sometimes think I should have tried to do something similar.

There’s Nothing to Worry About had emerged on screen, exploding bottoms and all, in June of 1982 in the Granada region only. We went back down to London to write in July, August and September for the new series which was to be called Alfresco.



Hugh, Emma, Ben, self, Siobhan and Paul: There’s Nothing to Worry About, Granada TV, 1982. Oh, but there was…





Computer 1

One free afternoon in Manchester I had walked to the Arndale Centre and drifted from shop to shop. In a branch of Lasky’s I found myself staring in perplexity at a group of teenagers clustered around a display stand. I approached and looked over their shoulders …

Half an hour later I was fiddling with the back of the television in my Midland Hotel bedroom. After ten frustrating and confused minutes Ceefax-style text appeared on the screen.


BBC Computer 32K

BASIC


It was the beginning of a lifelong love affair, the details of which will bore you dreadfully. I shall try not to linger on the subject too long, but the relationship was and is too important to me for it to be consigned to a quick sentence. Most of my spare hours were now spent in front of this transcendently lovely (to me) machine, an Acorn BBC Micro B computer. At that time microcomputers relied on two household appliances to work properly: a television for display and a cassette tape-recorder for recording and loading programs. The Lasky’s salesman had persuaded me to buy a program called Wordwise, which came on a ROM chip that you plugged into one of four slots on the circuit board. The other spaces were for the operating system and the BASIC programming language. With Wordwise plugged into the first slot the computer magically started up as a word-processor. I could attach it by a wide-ribboned parallel connector to a Brother electric typewriter which now became a slave printer. I cannot explain my fascination and delight. With exultation I would show my friends the computer, the programs I had written and the printer printing out. Everybody cooed and wowed obediently, but I could tell they were not moved in the same way that I was. It puzzled me that I should be so captivated by this new world when others were so relatively unengaged. Certainly the system was clever, one could do remarkable things with it, and most people were impressed – in the standard ‘Tch, whatever will they think of next?’ way – but for me the excitement was about so much more than function. I have long since given up trying to understand this undying obsession, which rapidly took on all the form, manner and behaviour of a classic addiction. I passed most of what spare time I had with my head buried in dedicated microcomputer magazines or haunting the Tottenham Court Road on the look-out for new peripherals. I would stay up at the keyboard until three, four or five in the morning writing pointless programs or attempting to master useless techniques. Within a very short time I had filled my corner of the Chelsea flat with a daisy-wheel printer, a plotter, a dedicated RGB monitor and an add-on for an extra processor and floppy disks. My lifelong battle to control cabling began at this time. All the cables I have ever owned would stretch to the moon and back. Except they would not be able to because they would fail to connect up with each other. Anyone can write a credible story in which humans can teleport, travel in time and make themselves invisible. A future in which there are cable compatibility standards, that would be real science fiction.

Cables, monitors, printers, books, magazines, disks – all these were costing me money. Money that I did not have.

Richard Armitage had told me with an expansive wave of a cigar-brandishing hand that if ever I was running low, his assistant, Lorraine Hamilton, would send me cheques to cover my expenses. These would count as advances against future earnings. Despite Kim’s relative wealth and his easy generosity, I had run up a debt of several thousand pounds with Richard by the August of 1982 and was beginning to worry that I would never earn enough to be able to pay him back.





Commercial

One morning Lorraine called me up at the Chelsea flat. I know it was at the Chelsea flat because in those days when you rang someone you always knew where they were. The closest life came to a mobile phone was a handset with an extra-long flex. Lorraine told me to go to an office in Fitzrovia and meet a man called Paul Weiland, who was casting a beer commercial.

A beer commercial? Me? A low vulgar commercial, for a highly polished artist such as myself? How unbelievably insulting. I almost ran to the appointed place.

The golden age of British advertising was just coming to an end. The most prominent stars to have risen over the past decade had been Ridley and Tony Scott, Hugh Hudson, David Puttnam and Alan Parker, who now all devoted their time to feature films. Paul Weiland, a generation behind, had started his career as a tea boy at the production office where most of those big names had worked and was to become the leading commercials director of the eighties and nineties. Indeed he still reigns supreme.

He handed me a script that was really more of a photocopied storyboard. It showed a monocled Victorian aristocrat in a series of unlikely poses.

‘There’s no dialogue,’ Paul said. ‘The whole commercial is played out to a soundtrack. The song “Abdul Abulbul Amir”. Do you know it?’

I had to confess that I did not.

‘Never mind. Take this mug. You’re drinking the beer. It’s Whitbread Best Bitter. You’re Count Ivan Skavinsky Skavar, and I’m Abdul. Just give me a really snooty look. Snootier! As if he’s a caterpillar in your salad or shit on your shoe.’

For ten minutes I pretended to drink Whitbread snootily while a most peculiar song played in the background. I am not sure I have ever been more embarrassed and uncomfortable or felt more ill at ease, self-conscious and incompetent. When it was all over I left, blushing furiously.

‘Well, Stephen,’ I said to myself, ‘that is the last you will ever hear of that. Perhaps it is as well. Perhaps I was so bad because my innermost soul was revolting at the mercenary grubbiness of the whole enterprise. Yes. That will be it.’

The next day Lorraine called up and asked me to come into the Noel Gay offices in Denmark Street. Richard was sitting behind his enormous desk, beaming behind a thick curtain of Villiger cigar smoke.

‘They want you for the Whitbread commercial,’ he said. ‘But I’m afraid they’re being irritatingly tough on the money.’

Oh well, I thought. Five or six hundred pounds would come in useful. It would be as much as that, surely.

‘They offered twenty,’ said Richard, ‘and I can’t seem to get them above twenty-five. If you find that insulting we can always walk away.’

‘For how many hours’ work?’

Richard looked down at his notes. ‘Three days.’

‘Blimey,’ I said, trying not to look too disappointed. ‘It isn’t much.’

‘No,’ said Richard. ‘It’s just over eight thousand a day. Well, if you feel …’

Thousand! I swallowed drily, pushing my Adam’s apple past a throbbing constriction that was rising in my throat and threatening to cause me to choke. Twenty-five thousand pounds. For three days’ work.

‘No, no!’ I faltered. ‘I mean … no. It’s fine. I’ll …’

‘They speak very highly of Paul Weiland. Good experience for you. Starts shooting in Shepperton on Monday. They’ll want you at Bermans and Nathans for a costume fitting tomorrow at three. Excellent. I’ll call the agency.’

I tottered about London for the rest of that morning in a dream.

I could pay back Noel Gay Artists everything I owed them and I would still be rich. Rich beyond the dreams of avarice. Well, not that, obviously. The dreams of avarice go well beyond twenty-five odd thousand pounds minus 15 per cent commission, minus tax and VAT, minus three and a half thousand already owing. But rich enough for me.

You would have just cause to hate me now, reader, when I tell you that from that day to this I have never had what one could seriously call money troubles. Not money troubles of the kind that cause so many people to wake up in the middle of the night with a ghastly feeling like molten lead leaking into their stomach as they contemplate mounting debt and the apparent impossibility of getting their finances in order. That tremble of panic and dread that so many feel in relation to money I have been spared. I feel it for other things but I know that many in the world would trade much for the kind of cushion of cash that has enveloped me for thirty years. I did not know, as I went about London window-shopping that day, that in two and a half years’ time even more money would start pouring in.

The three days of the shoot in Shepperton Studios passed in a sweat of worry, embarrassment and confusion. I had no idea why everything took so long, what I was doing, who everyone was or what the commercial was about. Tim McInnerny, whom I was to get to know two years later when I joined the cast of Blackadder II, had been cast as a lute-wielding minstrel of some kind. The character of Abdul was played by an actor called Tony Cosmo, who was suitably swarthy and menacing. I, in my own estimation, failed to be suitably anything. Watching it today on YouTube (try searching for Whitbread Best Bitter 1982 Ad or similar) the film still appears to make very little sense, and I am sure that even now my discomfort in the role of Count Ivan transmits across the decades. I think I was cast on account of my pointy chin rather than because of any discernible skill or talent.

Paul Weiland was charming and easy-going. My memories of the exceptionally laid-back Hugh Hudson on the set of Chariots of Fire had prepared me to expect relaxation from the director and fiery shouting only from assistants, and this was exactly how it was. I spent most of the three days sitting in a canvas chair and drinking cups of tea while birds twitted and shitted in the gantry far above. There are generations of pigeon, sparrow and chaffinch that have lived out their lives in the roof spaces of the great sound stages of Pinewood and Shepperton. They have dumped their droppings on some of the immortal scenes of British cinema, and their screechings have interrupted dialogue from Dirk Bogarde, John Mills, Kenneth Williams, Roger Moore and a thousand others. Mostly, however, they have overseen the less glamorous business of commercial and pop video shoots that make up the bread-and-butter business for studio staff, film crews and happily overpaid actors. I know that I am supposed to be ashamed of advertising work and feel that it is either beneath me or some kind of sell-out, but I cannot bring myself to apologize or regret. Orson Welles always said with high-handed disdain, ‘If it was good enough for Toulouse-Lautrec and John Everett Millais, then it is good enough for me,’ but I don’t really feel the need to adduce the names of great figures from the past, I just find it fun.





Create!

We were back in Manchester by October filming for Alfresco which, unlike There’s Nothing to Worry About, was to be broadcast nationally. Ben had created for us a fictional world which he called The Pretend Pub. The concept might kindly be described as playful meta-textual post-modernism. Most people, however, were not kind and seemed to regard it as incomprehensible self-indulgent twaddle, which I suppose is how most playful meta-textual post-modernism is received. We all portrayed heightened versions of ourselves in an obviously unreal studio pub. I was Stezzer, Hugh was Huzzer, Robbie Bobzer, Ben Bezzer, Emma Ezzer and Siobhan Shizzer. We still often call each other by those names to this day, although Ben, for reasons lost in time, usually calls me Bing.



Alfresco, series 2: The Pretend Pub.

In the first episode, I enter, covered in polystyrene flakes of stage snow, greeting Robbie with the words, ‘My word, Pretend Landlord Bobzer, there’s a hell of a theatrical effect going on out there …’ We performed these sketches in front of a mostly silent and bemused audience. We consoled ourselves with the thought that we were ahead of our time. I think a great deal of the problem came from self-consciousness. Ben knew very well (partly because he was directly involved) what his contemporaries were doing in the field of alternative comedy, and Hugh and I were painfully and acutely aware of what our tradition had done in the field of sketch comedy, from Pete and Dud through to Python and Not the Nine O’Clock News. As a result we were guilty, it is clear looking back, of over-complicating everything out of a fear of being perceived as imitative and unoriginal. We ruled out parodies and ‘Ah, come in, Perkins, shut the door, do sit down,’ sketches because Python and Not had done these. Surreality and anarchic weirdness were out too because Rik, Ade and Alexei had cornered that market. So we wallowed about sightlessly, guiltily and confusedly without the confidence to do what we did best. Audiences, I now realize (and frankly it should always have been blindingly obvious), do not think along such lines. Novelty and originality do not come from the invention of new milieus, new genres or new modalities. They come from the how and the who, not from the what. It hardly warrants pointing out, furthermore, that no one will get anywhere unless they do what they do best, and everyone, in their secret, secret heart, knows what they do best.



An Alfresco sketch that a merciful providence has erased from my memory.

Meanwhile Steve Morrison, our Scottish executive producer, pleaded with us to stop bellyaching. ‘Go out and create, man!’ he yelled at me across a table one stormy afternoon, when I was behaving more than usually pedantically or sceptically or in some other manner guaranteed to annoy. He stood and pointed at the door. ‘I want Ayckbourn with edge,’ he screamed. ‘Go out and bring me Ayckbourn with edge!’ Well, quite.

It was made obvious to us that high up in Granada a problem with our writing had been identified. In the case of Ben it might have been over-productivity and a lack of self-censorship; in the case of Hugh and me it was exactly the opposite – crippling constipation and a kind of apologetic, high-toned embarrassment that must have been excessively irritating. For one excruciating week we all had to undergo a kind of comedy-writing masterclass with Bernie Sahlins, one of the producers of the Second City revue group and television show. Bernie, brother of the anthropologist Marshall Sahlins, was from a tradition of improvisation that he helped create back in the days of Mike Nichols and Elaine May, a tradition that had burst into television and more recently film with the Saturday Night Live generation of Aykroyd, Chase, Murray, Belushi and Radner. Ben wrote alone and wasn’t faintly interested in the styles and techniques of Chicago improv. Hugh and I were pretty appalled too at the idea of ‘building a scene’ through improvisational dialogue in the approved American way. When we wrote together we sometimes did improvise, inasmuch as we made a sketch up out loud as we went along before committing it to paper. I suspect that if we had been accused of improvising we would have frozen in horror midway and would never have been able to continue. The cultural gulf between our way and Bernie Sahlins’s way must have perplexed and even offended him, but it was an unbridgeable one and he left Manchester after five days without having made a dent in us. He did teach us that if we had been born American we would never ever have made it in the comedy business and we perhaps taught him that the British people are stubborn, shy and entirely dominated by their single predominant emotion, affect, vice, characteristic, disease … whatever one might call it: embarrassment. Ben carried on pouring out script after script in his way, and we carried on not pouring out anything much in ours.

As well as Steve Morrison, Sandy Ross, Robbie and Siobhan, we now had a fifth Scot on board in the shape of a producer called John G. Temple. Hugh revealed that Temple had approached him early one morning as we had been getting into costumes for a day’s filming and asked him what drugs I was on.

‘No drugs,’ Hugh had said. ‘That’s just how Stephen is.’

When he relayed this exchange to me I had been profoundly shocked. What was it about me that could possibly lead a stranger to leap to the instant conclusion that I must be on drugs? Hugh explained to me with as much tact as he could manage that it was possibly my excessive energy in the mornings. I had always been loud and verbally exuberant from the earliest hours, but it had never occurred to me that this mania might be extreme enough to present the appearance of drug abuse. Everyone else was used to my often exaggerated elation and bounce, but they were evidently weird enough to a newcomer like John to excite the wildest speculation.

Perhaps this should have sounded as a warning in my head for me to attend to my states of mind a little more carefully, but when one is young eccentricities, moods and behavioural ticks are easily overlooked, ignored or laughingly dealt with. One is so much more supple. One can bend with all the gnarls and twists and kinks that life and the caprices of one’s mind confer. Past forty it is, of course, another story. What once was whippy and pliable now snaps like dried bone. So much that is charming, unusual, provocative and admirably strange in youth becomes tragic, lonely, pathological, boring, and ruinous in middle age. A hurt or troubled mind plays out a story very like that of an alcoholic’s life. A twenty-year-old who drinks heavily is a bit of a rogue; sometimes he may be a little flushed in the face, sometimes too pie-eyed to turn up to this or that appointment on time, but usually he (or she of course) will be loveable enough and resilient enough to get on with life. Quite when the broken veins, spongy nose, humourless bloodshot eyes and hideous personality changes take full root it is hard to say, but one day everyone notices that their hard-drinking friend is no longer funny and no longer charming – they have become an embarrassment, a liability and a bore. I have seen and experienced the same with little personality wrinkles and dispositions that have been so acceptable and endearing and apparently harmless in youth, yet have proved destructive to the point of agony, addiction, degeneration, misery, self-harm and suicide in later years. There have been moments in writing this book when I have looked back at nearly all my friends and contemporaries (myself included of course), so many of them blessed with talent, brains, brilliance and good fortune, and I have found myself forced to believe that all of us have failed in life. Or life has failed us. In our fifties the physical deterioration which one would naturally expect has been far outstripped by disappointment, bitterness, despair, mental instability and failure.

Then I slap myself across the chops and tell myself not to be so hysterical and self-dramatizing. And yet the episode with the car might be regarded by some doctors as a typical episode of hypomanic grandiosity…





Car

The sixth Scot in the Alfresco line-up was Dave McNiven, our resident musical director and composer. Naturally I saw very little of him. Once his sensitive ear had heard me miming, our professional paths were set never to cross again. You may wonder how he can have heard me miming, but this just shows the depths of unmusicality to which I was capable of sinking. It is very hard to be in a chorus and to mime without one’s vocal chords just occasionally making themselves heard. A musical ear can pick up a discord instantly, no matter how many voices are singing and no matter how low and inadvertent the tiny sound that emanates. I shall never forget the shocked look on Dave’s face as he spun round in my direction. I had seen it before and I was destined to see it many times again. It was the particular look of dismay that registers on the countenance of one who only moments before has said with supreme certainty and unruffled confidence, ‘Oh, believe me, everyone can sing!’ I exist on this planet precisely to teach such wrong-headed optimists the error of their convictions.

The afternoons given over to music rehearsals, therefore, I filled with more driving lessons. I had taken a few while teaching at Cundall Manor. Back then, as I had bucked and jerked the motoring-school’s Austin Metro down the main street of Thirsk I had been told with hard Yorkshire disdain, ‘Tha gear and clutch control is shite, and tha steering is as much use as a chocolate teapot.’ The Mancunian instructor four years later was much friendlier, as people so often are west of the Pennines, or perhaps it was that my car-handling skills had improved in the interval. He would hum quietly to himself and look interestedly out of the window at the street scenes that flashed by, apparently confident enough in my driving not to bother about what I was doing as I manoeuvred the dual-control Escort along his favourite route, past the university halls of residence in Rusholme and Fallowfield, down Kingsway and into the maze of residential backstreets around Cheadle Hulme. One afternoon, quite unexpectedly, he announced that I was ready to take my test and that he had booked me in for the following week.

‘If you’ve no objection?’

Half an hour later I found myself in a BMW showroom, shaking hands on a deal. I have no idea what rush of blood to the head had propelled me there but by the time I left it was too late to do anything about it. I had called up my bank and arranged the financing and was now the legal owner of a second-hand 323i in metallic green. Sunroof, Blaupunkt stereo and 16,000 miles on the clock.

That evening, not having dared tell Hugh that I had done something so magisterially arsey and recklessly tempting of providence as to buy a car before I had even passed my driving test, we all gathered in my room at the Midland Hotel. I ordered up wine, beer and crisps and we watched a repeat of May’s original transmission of our Footlights show. Two days later we assembled again with even more wine, beer and crisps to watch the launch of the all-new Channel 4, which included in its opening night line-up Comic Strip Presents … Five Go Mad in Dorset, in which Robbie played two parts. This was the first new channel on British television since the arrival of BBC 2 in 1964.

I passed my driving test, raced around insurance offices and returned to the car showroom properly possessed of paperwork that allowed me to drive away. I had teased and flirted with destiny and got away with it. If I had failed my test I wonder what I would have done with the car? Simply left it there I suppose.



I host a bed party in my room at the Midland Hotel. We seem happy. I think perhaps we were.





Challenge 2

A week later we met for a third time in my hotel room and, surrounded by all the wine, beer and crisps the Midland staff could produce, we watched the first episode of The Young Ones, which Ben had co-written and in which he also appeared.

Within a week then, two seismic events had rocked our little world. The gleaming primary-coloured blocks that had flown out to form the graphic figure 4 which made up the channel’s logo seemed, with their smooth, computer-generated motion, to usher in a brave new world, and when Ade Edmondson as Vyvyan punched his way through the kitchen wall in the opening five minutes of The Young Ones it felt as though a whole new generation had punched its way into British cultural life and that nothing would ever be the same again.

The Young Ones was an instant success in exactly the way Alfresco, whose first series wasn’t broadcast until mid-1983, manifestly wasn’t. Rik Mayall especially soared into stardom as the new King of Comedy: the brilliantly childish, Cliff-Richard-obsessed character of Rick in The Young Ones with his exaggerated derhotacizations and uncontrolled giggling snorts sealed a reputation that had grown from Rik’s original 20th Century Coyote act with Ade Edmondson and his sublime appearances in A Kick Up the Eighties as Kevin Turvey, the Chic Murray of Kidderminster.

The wild divergence I felt between this hot lava stream of new talent and the constipated conventional and constricted tradition from which I derived was extreme and has, I am sure you will feel, been dwelt on enough. From the distance of thirty years it seems self-indulgent and paranoid to harp on about it, but the distinction did at least lead to one fruitful conversation in the bar of the Midland in January 1983. Ben, Rik and Lise had already started work on a second series of The Young Ones, and the thought had struck me, having spent so much time in Granadaland and having watched lines of undergraduates queuing up, as I had three years earlier, for canteen lunches in between rounds of University Challenge, that perhaps Rick, Vyvyan, Neil and Mike, being a student foursome, might themselves be entered for the quiz, with, as the Radio Times might phrase it, hilarious consequences. I suggested this to Ben, who instantly enthused. He and the others produced ‘Bambi’, in which the Young Ones, representing Scumbag University, come up against Footlights College, Oxbridge, in the snooty, privileged persons of Hugh, Emma, Ben and me. My character was called Lord Snot, an insanely shiny toff based on the Beano’s Lord Snooty.

Ben may well have a different memory of the genesis of that episode. It is one of the known eternal truths of comic creation that a good idea has a dozen parents while a duff one remains an orphan. From wherever or whomever this idea derived the show was recorded a year or so later with Griff Rhys Jones as Bambi Gascoigne and Mel Smith as a Granada TV security guard. It is still considered, I think, one of the most memorable of The Young Ones episodes, in part because of an unusually strong and coherent narrative and in part also because the parricidal revenge of the new and radical upon the old and reactionary is played out so literally and satisfyingly. Footlights College are routed and humiliated as completely in fiction as we felt we were being in fact.



The Young Ones. Comic heroes.

I have mentioned that we were all – Hugh and I to a crippling extent – hobbled by self-consciousness and a foolish desire to avoid what we considered had been done before. But did we have any kind of a theory of comedy, any banner that we wanted to raise?

It was clear to me that Hugh had a more complete canteen of comic cutlery in his drawer than the pitiful selection of plastic coffee-stirrers and archaic horn-handled knives that I felt capable of wielding. As I have said, I was aware without envy, but with a measure of sorrow and self-pity, that Hugh was a master of three enormously important elements of comedy in which I was an embarrassing incompetent. He had music. He could play any instrument that he picked up and he could sing. He had physical control of his body. As a natural athlete he could roll, fall, leap, dance and jig to comic effect. He had an amusing, appealing face that made him a natural clown. Big sad eyes, a funny chin and a hilarious upper lip. And I? I could be verbally adept and I could play pompous authority figures and … er … that was it, really. Could I cut it as an actor, or had my commitment to comedy cut that avenue off? In the comic world I had no social or political axe to grind, no new stylistic mode to advance. I liked the old-fashioned sketch comedy for which it was beginning to look as though the world had little time.

I worried that I was going to have to be primarily a writer. Why worry, you might ask? Well, although it is true that one feels fantastic when one has finished a writing task, it is mostly horrible while one is doing it. You will see therefore that writing, ghastly at the time but great afterwards, is exactly the opposite of sex. All that keeps one going is the knowledge that one will feel good when it’s all over. I knew, as all writers know, that performers have a much easier life. They swan about being admired, recognized, pampered, praised and told how wonderful they are and what energy and resource and strength they have to cope with all that pressure. Pah. They only work while they are in rehearsal, on set or on stage; for the rest of the time they can get up late and laze and lounge about like lords. Writers on the other hand are in a permanent state of school exam crisis. Deadlines croak and beat their wings above them like sinister rooks; producers, publishers and performers nag for rewrites and improvements. Any down time looks like evasion and indolence. There is no moment at which one cannot, and should not it seems, be at one’s desk. It is also a desperately lonely calling.

There are compensations. You only have to write a play once and then you can sit back and let the money roll in, while the actors have to perform eight times a week for six months to earn their pay packets.

Hugh and I were writer-performers – we wrote the material that we performed. I could not decide whether this meant we had the best of both worlds or the worst. To this day I cannot be sure. It is obvious, however, that in terms of employment it doubles one’s opportunities. Whatever I lacked in physical attributes as a natural clown I seemed to make up for in gravitas, to use Hugh’s word. It seemed that people did have faith in my ability to write, although I had produced nothing up until that point except Latin! And, with Hugh, the material in The Cellar Tapes and the handful of Alfresco sketches that had made it through to transmission.

Four things now happened in a succession rapid enough to be called simultaneity and which served to bolster the self-esteem that the Alfresco experience was doing so much to undermine.





Cinema

In the late summer of 1982 I was sent to meet a woman called Jilly Gutteridge and a man called Don Boyd. Boyd had produced Alan Clarke’s cinema version of Scum (the original 1977 BBC television production had been Mary Whitehoused off the screen) as well as Derek Jarman’s Tempest and Julien Temple’s The Great Rock ’n’ Roll Swindle and he now planned to direct his first major feature film, which was to be called Gossip. He imagined a British compendium of The Sweet Smell of Success and La Dolce Vita infused with the spirit and manner of Evelyn Waugh’s Vile Bodies. This was to be a film that would capture a new and horrible side to Thatcher’s Britain: the recently confident, arrogant, vulgar Sloaney world in which night-club narcissists, trust-fund trash and philistine druggie aristos cavorted with recently cherished icons of finance, fashion and celebrity. It was a soulless, squalid, valueless and trashy milieu that believed itself to be the stylish social summit at whose dazzling peaks the lower world gazed with breathless envy and admiration.

A script had been written by the brothers Michael and Stephen Tolkin. Although their screenplay had been set in Britain, Don felt that, as Americans, they had not quite captured the world of London ‘society’ such as it was in the early eighties and he was after someone who could rewrite it in an authentic English voice. Jilly Gutteridge, who was to be location manager and assistant producer, was instantly affectionate and charmingly enthusiastic about my talents, and I walked away from the meeting having been given the job of rewriting the script for the princely sum of £1,000. I had three weeks in which to do it. The part of the lead character, a beau monde gossip columnist, was to be played by Anne Louise Lambert. Anthony Higgins, who had starred opposite her in Peter Greenaway’s The Draughtsman’s Contract, would be the man with whom she falls in love and who would rescue her from the unworthy world she inhabits. Simon Callow and Gary Oldman were also cast. It was to be Oldman’s first film appearance.

I rewrote in a fever of excitement, and Don seemed pleased with my efforts. His preparations were well advanced for what I soon learnt was known as the ‘principal photography’. In the meanwhile, he suggested, I might enjoy a meeting with Michael Tolkin, who just happened to be in town. As one of the original writers he had read my anglicizing rewrites with great interest and might even have one or two valuable suggestions …

I assented to this idea, and Tolkin and I met in an Italian restaurant called the Villa Puccini which was just yards from the Draycott Place flat.

‘The Villa Puccini,’ said Kim. ‘Named, one must suppose, after the famous composer Villa-Lobos.’

The lunch was not destined to be the feast of reason and the flow of soul of which P. G. Wodehouse and Alexander Pope wrote so fondly. Tolkin was very disapproving of what I had done to his beloved story. He was outraged at my excision of a synagogue scene.

‘The focal point of the narrative. The pivot about which the entire movie revolves. The centrepiece. The keystone. The emotional heart. The whole picture is meaningless without that scene. There is no picture without it. You couldn’t see that?’

I tried as best I could to explain why I had felt it was wrong and unconvincing.

‘And as for your ending …’

I suspect he may have been right about my ending. As far as I recall I had Claire, the heroine, escape into the arms of a Cambridge don, which was neither very Fellini nor very Evelyn Waugh and in its own way was probably as sentimental as the synagogue scene. Nonetheless I attempted to defend it.

‘It is obvious,’ said Tolkin, ‘that we have nothing in common and no basis for further discussion.’ He left the restaurant before the primi piatti arrived. He has since had a highly successful writing career with credits that include The Player, Deep Impact and Nine. Maybe he was right. Maybe I had ruined Gossip with my cynical British resistance to the possibilities of emotional change and with my inept ending. In any event the film never got made. The story of its disaster is complicated but, I am happy to say, has nothing to do with my screenplay, good or bad as that may have been.

It seems that Don Boyd had been hoodwinked by two plausible characters who claimed to represent something they called the Martini Foundation. Rich with funds accrued from the sale of the vermouth business, this foundation wanted to branch out into film financing. The two promised that $20 million would be made available to Don for a whole slate of feature films. In the meantime he could finance Gossip by raising money against ‘certificates of deposit’ that were lodged in a bank in the Netherlands. For their investment the Martini people would receive 50 per cent of the profits and a £600,000 upfront fee.

Don set to work on the construction of a huge Andrew McAlpine-designed night-club set in Twickenham Studios, and filming began some time in late October, using money that had been advanced by a third party against the arrival of these certificates of deposit. Hugh Laurie, John Sessions and others had also been cast, and about a fifth of the whole movie had been committed to celluloid by the time the terrible truth emerged that there were no certificates of deposit, that those two plausible figures with their Mayfair flat and Cannes yacht had no connection with Martini Rosso or its money and that Don had been ruthlessly swindled. They imagined, one supposes, that they would get their £600,000 finder’s fee and skedaddle. Fortunately the whole house of cards collapsed before they could profit from their deception, but it was small consolation. The film collapsed. The technical unions and the acting union Equity demanded blood. Many of the crew and cast salaries, and many of the production costs had not yet been met (the Tolkins and I had been scrupulously paid as it happens) and all was ruin, recrimination and wrath. The upshot was that poor Don, one of the kindest and best of men, was effectively blacklisted and prevented from participating in film production for three years. Even that didn’t end it, for once Don managed to start up again the unions insisted he continue to pay over what negligible producing fees he did earn. By 1992 he was financially wiped out. If he had declared himself bankrupt the moment disaster had struck he might have saved his house and possessions. In fact he sold most of what he had to repay debts because he believed that to be the honourable course.

Don Boyd was ill-treated, cold-shouldered and bad-mouthed by many in the British film industry who blamed him for being either foolishly naive, or worse, being somehow implicated in the smoky business of the fraudulent Martini Foundation. Many wiser and better heads than his had advised him that the financing deal was sound and that he was right to proceed. It was a catastrophic error to go into production without a sight of these ‘certificates of deposit’, but so talented, idealistic and passionately committed a film-maker did not deserve the opprobrium and pariah status he was accorded for so many years. It was certainly a hell of a way for me to be dunked, a year after leaving university, into the murky waters of the film business.





Church and Chekhov

A few months after the Gossip imbroglio a theatrical producer called Richard Jackson called me up and invited me to his offices in Knightsbridge. He had seen Latin! in Edinburgh and had a desire to produce it at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, with a very young Nicholas Broadhurst directing. I made it clear that my commitments to Alfresco meant that I would be unable to play the role of Dominic, the part I had written for myself, but this did not seem to put Jackson off. I was immensely gratified by this. You might think my actor’s self-esteem might be dented to hear a producer take so blithely the news that I was not available, but actually my writer’s self-esteem was immensely boosted by the idea that a professional man of the theatre believed the play to be strong enough to merit a life without me.

Many months earlier I had had a conversation with a television director called Geoffrey Sax, who was keen to make a small-screen version of Latin! I underwent the nervous excitement of a phone conversation with the great Michael Hordern, who had expressed an interest in the part of Herbert Brookshaw and who listened kindly and calmly to my incoherent plans for the adaptation. Nothing came of this, although I was to see Geoffrey Sax eight years later, when he directed an episode of The New Statesman in which I made a guest appearance, and again almost twenty years after that, when he directed me in a small role in the film Stormbreaker. Few people in one’s life ever go quite away. They turn up again like characters in a Simon Raven novel. It is as if Fate is a movie producer who cannot afford to keep introducing new characters into the script but must get as many scenes out of every actor as possible.

Nicholas and Richard were confident that they could mount Latin! with ease, but the role of Dominic turned out to be more difficult to cast than they had anticipated. While I was up in Manchester for Alfresco Series Two they auditioned dozens and dozens of young actors, none of whom they felt to be quite right. At a meeting in Richard’s office I nervously made a suggestion.

‘Look, I know how pathetic this sounds. But there’s someone I was at university with. He’s a really good actor and very funny.’

‘Oh yes?’

Richard and Nicholas were polite, but there are few phrases more certain to send a chill down the spine of a producer than ‘There’s this friend of mine … he’s awfully good …’

I carried on. ‘He’s left Cambridge now and he’s at the Guildhall School; actually he enrolled at the music school. To be an opera singer. But I heard that he’s just switched over to the drama department.’

‘Oh yes?’

‘Well, as I say, I know it’s … but he really is very good …’

‘Oh yes?’

A week later Richard called up.

‘I have to confess we are at our wits’ end. What was the name of this friend of yours at RADA?’

‘The Guildhall, not RADA, and he’s called Simon Beale.’

‘Well, I won’t deny it. We’re desperate. Nicholas will see him.’

Two days later Nicholas called up ecstatically. ‘My God, he’s brilliant. Perfect. Absolutely perfect.’

I knew he would be. Ever since I had shared a stage with his arse-scratching Sir Politic Would-Be in Volpone I had known Simon was the real thing.

A snag was foreseen. Would the Guildhall actually let him play the part? He was a student following a specific course, and aside from the performances, which cut enough into his day (this was to be a lunchtime performance at the Lyric), there were the rehearsals to be considered too. Newly appointed as director of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama was the actor and founder member of the Royal Shakespeare Company Tony Church, and his permission to release Simon was sought.

The answer he gave was magnificent in its preciosity and absurd actorly self-importance.

‘I can see that this is an engagement that Simon is keen to accept,’ he said. ‘It is an excellent role for him and, aside from anything else, it guarantees his provisional Equity ticket …’ In those days the acquisition of an Equity card was absolutely essential for any actor. The world of drama presented that exquisitely cruel Catch-22 bind common to all closed shops: only Equity members could get an acting job, and you could not become an Equity member unless you had an acting job. Hugh and I had secured our cards because we had a Granada TV contract and because as writer–performers we could show that no existing Equity member would be able satisfactorily to take our places. Tony Church was recognizing, therefore, the excellence of the opportunity that Simon Beale was being offered. ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘I will not stand in his way. However …’

Nicholas and Richard (I was not present) blanched nervously.

‘However,’ continued Church, ‘for the period that he will be away rehearsing and performing he will exactly miss out on the three weeks in which we will be covering Chekhovian characterization and performance. So I am duty bound, I am duty bound to warn Simon that if he goes ahead with this play it will leave one heck of a hole in his Chekhov technique.’

He was a fine man, Tony Church, and one endowed with an excellent sense of humour, so it is to be hoped he would not have minded my repeating this. The idea, the idea that any actor would somehow be left deficient by missing out on three weeks of drama-school Chekhov teaching is so preposterous, so frankly insane that one simply does not know where to begin. If ever I am asked by aspiring young actors or their parents whether or not they should go to drama school, the memory of Tony Church and his fear for Simon’s Chekhov technique almost makes me tell them on no account to go anywhere near such useless palaces of self-regarding folly and delusion. Of course, I do not offer any advice at all other than suggesting that budding actors should follow their hearts and other such sententious and harmless ullage, but one does wonder, one really does.

Simon Beale, under his Equity name of Simon Russell Beale, has become almost universally recognized as the finest stage actor of his generation. For many, the greatest of his theatrical achievements have been his interpretations of – yes, of course – characters in the plays of Chekhov. His stunning performances in The Seagull at the RSC, Uncle Vanya at the Donmar Warehouse (for which he won an Olivier Award) and The Cherry Orchard at the Old Vic and in New York have earned unanimous praise. I wonder if any of his Guildhall contemporaries, the ones lucky enough to have stayed in school for those vital lessons in technique, have enjoyed comparable success with Chekhov?

The production of Latin! was, in its own small way, accounted a success. Simon was brilliant, and a glowing review from the great Harold Hobson made me very happy indeed.





Cockney Capers

The weekend after Latin! completed its little run I stayed at Richard Armitage’s house in Essex. The house was called Stebbing Park and it was a fine old mansion set in many acres of gently rolling countryside. The village of Stebbing is close to Dunmow in an area of Essex that belies the county’s unfortunate and unjustified reputation.

Stebbing Park came into its own every summer when Richard held a festival of cricket. David Frost, one of his first clients, would keep wicket, Russell Harty would lie on the boundary ropes and admire the thews of Michael Praed and other handsome young actors, Andrew Lloyd Webber would arrive by helicopter, the controllers of BBC1 and BBC2 would cluster in corners with Bill Cotton and the Director General. It seemed as if Richard could attract every important figure from British screen and stage. Rowan Atkinson, Emma Thompson, Hugh, Tony Slattery, Tilda Swinton, Howard Goodall and I came every year, as did dozens of other Noel Gay clients, Richard Stilgoe, Chris Barrie, Hinge and Bracket, Dollar, the Cambridge Buskers, Jan Leeming, Manuel and the Music of the Mountains, the King’s Singers, Geoff Love – it was a most eccentric mixture.

On this occasion, however, it was just me, Richard and Lorraine Hamilton, the sweet, shy young woman with whom he shared his life and who worked as his assistant. We had Richard’s chef-butler, Ken, all to ourselves.

After an excellent dinner on Friday night, as Ken poured coffee in the drawing-room, Richard, greatly to my surprise, started to talk about his father. Reginald Armitage was the son of a pomfret-cake manufacturer in south Yorkshire. He had been educated at the Queen Elizabeth Grammar School in Wakefield, the Royal College of Music and Christ’s College, Cambridge. His musicianship won him the place, at an early age, as music director and organist at St Anne’s church, Soho. The ragtime, jazz and swing that permeated that part of London must have got into Reginald’s blood, for he soon found he had an extraordinary facility with light, bouncy, catchy tunes in the modern manner. To avoid upsetting his worthy Yorkshire parents and the church authorities who employed him, he composed his songs under the pseudonym Noel Gay. An unfortunate name to our ears, but in the late twenties and thirties it suggested that happy, merry world of bright sunbursts that one sees in the surviving suburban front-door frames and wireless-set designs of the period. If there is a song that expresses that image perfectly it is his own ‘The Sun Has Got His Hat On’.

Noel Gay the composer became a gigantic success. At one point he had four musicals running in the West End simultaneously, a feat only Andrew Lloyd Webber has matched. His most famous tune, ‘The Lambeth Walk’, remains the only song ever written about in a Times leader. It also, Richard told me, earned Noel Gay an entry in the legendary black book of names of those who would be first up against the wall in the event of a Nazi invasion. Hitler did not take kindly, it was said, to a piece of newsreel that was very popular in British wartime cinemas which looped footage of the Führer saluting a goose-stepping cadre of Stormtroopers to the sound of ‘The Lambeth Walk’.

I had known very little of this and was touched that Richard thought I would be interested in the exploits of his famous father.

‘Of course, his greatest success,’ said Richard, ‘was the musical in which “The Lambeth Walk” featured, Me and My Girl.’

‘Right,’ I said, thinking in a rather puzzled way of the Gene Kelly/Judy Garland standard, ‘The bells are ringing, for me and my gal …’ – surely that was an American song?

‘Not to be confused, of course,’ said Richard, ‘with the Edgar Leslie number “For Me and My Gal”.’

‘No indeed. Of course not,’ I said, shocked at the idea that anyone might do such a thing.

‘Me and My Girl,’ said Richard, ‘was the most successful British musical of its day. It has only just been overtaken by Cats.’

Richard had one of those endearing habits, very common to agents, producers and magnates generally, of describing everything and everyone he knew as being more or less the most important, successful and respected example of its kind anywhere, ever: ‘certainly the most significant choreographer of his generation’; ‘the top wine-merchant in Britain’; ‘indisputably the most admired chef in all Asia’ – that sort of thing. It is especially impossible for people like Richard not to have the best doctor in London, the finest dentist in Europe and, favourite of all and endlessly trotted out whenever someone betrays the slightest dorsal twinge, ‘the best back man in the world’. I was already wise to this trait in Richard so could not be quite sure how much of what he said about Me and My Girl was true and how much a mixture of this signature hyperbole and understandable filial pride. For, in truth, I had not heard of the musical, nor its title song. I knew ‘The Lambeth Walk’, naturally; it is one of the most famous tunes ever, an Ohrwurm, as they say in Germany, an ear worm that once heard burrows its way into your brain and becomes impossible to dislodge. Actually I had always thought it a folk song, based on some ancient tune that had been handed down through the generations. It certainly never occurred to me that it might have been composed in the 1930s by a church organist.

Noel Gay had sent his son Richard to Eton, from where he had followed his father’s progress to Cambridge. In 1950 the young Richard Armitage founded Noel Gay Artists, a talent agency that was designed to enhance his father’s Noel Gay song publishing and production business by supplying singers to perform Noel Gay material. After six or seven years, as the ‘satire boom’ got under way, Richard found himself spreading into the new world of graduate comedy and took to trawling Cambridge each year for young comedy blades. He soon had David Frost on his books, then John Cleese and others. In the late seventies, in a wild, anarchic burst of originality, he looked westwards and from Oxford he took on Rowan Atkinson and Howard Goodall. By 1981 he was back at Cambridge and had scooped up Emma Thompson, Hugh Laurie, Paul Shearer, Tony Slattery and me.

Now in his mid-fifties, Richard found himself more and more often, he told me, looking back to the beginning of it all. This was all very interesting, and I was touched that someone usually so gruff, old-fashioned and unforthcoming about personal matters should favour me with the true story behind his father and the founding of Noel Gay Artists. I alternately nodded and shook my head in a manner that I hoped demonstrated how sensible I was of the honour he had accorded me and then started to make subtle yawn-stifling gestures designed to indicate that I was ready for bath, bed and book.

‘So this brings me,’ said Richard, choosing to ignore these signs, ‘to my proposition.’

‘Proposition?’

Richard’s hand scrabbled at the flaps of his old leather briefcase. ‘Take this.’

He handed me a thick foolscap typescript. Foolscap, for those under forty, was the English stationery paper size that preceded the now ubiquitous European A4 standard.

I examined the sheaf. Rust marks from the binders stained the cover page, but the double-underlined title was plain enough. ‘Oh,’ I said, ‘Me and My Girl! Is this the original script?’

‘As a matter of fact,’ said Richard, ‘it is the copy that came back from the Lord Chamberlain. There is a French’s acting edition, but what you are holding is, as far as I am aware, the version closest to the original text as performed in the Victoria Palace that there is in existence. I’d like you to read it. And then I would like you to consider rewriting it.’



The French’s acting edition of Me and My Girl.

I tottered upstairs and read the foolscap typescript in bed that night. It was almost impossible to understand. The hero was a Cockney costermonger called Bill Snibson who turns out to be the rightful heir to an earldom. That I could make out. Bill arrives at Hareford Hall, the ancestral home, to take up his position and in a series of mysterious scenes is alternately seduced by an aristocratic vamp, taught his family history and soaked for loans by his wastrel connections. Throughout it all runs the thread of his attempts not to lose Sally, his girl of the title. She is an honest Cockney with a noble heart as, au fond, is he.

I describe it as almost impossible to understand and I call the scenes ‘mysterious’ because of the incomprehensible ‘bus’ that was appended to almost every line of liberally exclamation-marked dialogue.


BILL: What you talking about, girl? (bus)

SALLY: Bill, you know very well! (bus)

BILL: You come here! (bus)


Or:


SIR JOHN: (taking book) Here! Give me that! (bus)

BILL: Oi! (bus)


And so on. Every now and then, throughout the script, there were blue pencil marks in a strong hand that read No! Absolutely not. Rewrite. Wholly unacceptable! and other furious expressions of crazed disapprobation.

At breakfast the next morning, Richard was keen to know my opinion.

‘Well,’ I said. ‘It is quite a period piece …’

‘Exactly! Which is why it needs to be updated for an eighties audience.’

‘That Cockney rhyming slang stuff seems a bit … well, a bit old hat …’

There had been a scene of several pages in which Bill laboriously took the family through the principles of rhyming slang.

‘Ah, but you see it was Me and My Girl that first introduced the British theatre-going middle-classes to rhyming slang,’ said Richard. ‘Up until then, it had never strayed beyond the East End.’

‘Ah, right. I see. But tell me, did the original producer really hate the script?’

‘What do you mean?’

‘All those comments. “Unacceptable”, “cut this” and so on. What were they about?’

‘I told you,’ said Richard. ‘This was the Lord Chamberlain’s copy.’

My blank expression revealed the unpardonable depths of my ignorance.

‘Until 1968 all plays performed in London had to be licensed by the Lord Chamberlain.’

‘Oh, so he was the censor?’

‘Effectively. The copy you have shows the cuts he, or rather his office, insisted upon in order to grant Me and My Girl its licence in 1937. You will notice they blue-pencil words like “cissy”.’

‘Literally blue-pencil.’

‘Quite so. But what did you make of the script otherwise?’

‘Gosh, it’s tremendous but … well … I have to say I don’t quite understand what the bus is doing there.’

‘The bus?’

‘I thought perhaps it was like the old word for to kiss, you know, to buss? But they can’t keep kissing each other all the time. And besides there’s often a bus in scenes between two male characters.’

Richard looked very puzzled for a moment and then a smile spread across his face. ‘Ha!’ His laugh always started with a whipcrack ‘ha!’ and then finished with a noise between his teeth that was half-way between the American ‘sheesh!’ and an attenuated, falsetto ‘siss!’

I had passed the typescript over to Lorraine Hamilton and I now stabbed my finger down at a ‘bus’. ‘There!’ I said. ‘Do you understand it?’

‘Well,’ said Lorraine. ‘I’m not quite sure … it does seem rather odd. Perhaps … mm, no, I can’t think …’

Richard looked from one to the other of us with mounting amusement. ‘Business, you imbeciles!’

‘Sorry?’

‘Bus is short for business.’

I am not sure that we looked any the wiser.

‘Bill was played by Lupino Lane. Lupino Lane was from a music-hall dynasty. He was the finest physical comedian of his day. A huge part of his success came from the remarkable knockabout routines he devised. His business with the cloak in Me and My Girl became one of the most famous sights on the London stage.’

Well, I shan’t take you through every twist and turn of the story of how Noel Gay’s musical came to be reworked for the 1980s. Richard, who acted as producer, secured Mike Ockrent to direct and as a co-producer he brought in David Aukin, who ran the Theatre Royal, Leicester, where the show was to be mounted. If it was a success there, the plan was to bring it into the West End. There was talk of Robert Lindsay for the lead role of Bill and Leslie Ash for Sally. Meanwhile it was up to me to rewrite the script from that Lord Chamberlain’s copy.

‘By the way,’ Richard had said. ‘Do feel free to add any of my father’s other songs that you think might fit.’

The script of a musical is divided into three departments: music, lyrics and book. The book might be considered everything that isn’t music or lyrics – the dialogue and story in other words. Nobody goes to a musical because of the book, they go to straight plays for that. On the other hand, the book is the spine of a musical. Like a spine it is only noticed when it goes wrong and like a spine, the book supports the entire frame and transmits the signals, messages and impulses that allow the body to feel, move and express itself. The great composers, Sondheim, Rogers, Porter and the rest, always insisted – indeed such insistence is one of the clichés of musical theatre – that everything starts with the book. The audience does not sing the book, nobody gasps and claps and delights in the book, but without it there is nothing. That is certainly not a complaint, by the way. There are plenty of essential jobs in the world of which people take little notice, and writing the book of the musical is amongst the least arduous and best rewarded of all of them.

In 1983 I didn’t know a book from a ball-change or a torch song. In fact I knew nothing about musicals at all. I was in my mid-twenties, just a year and a half out of university. I could talk nonsense all day about Shakespeare, Ibsen, Beckett or Tennessee Williams as required. I was sound on the history and heroes of radio and television comedy, which was after all, despite the dismal public reception to Alfresco, my profession. I had a good knowledge of cinema, especially Warner Brothers films of the thirties and forties and British cinema of the forties and fifties. My knowledge of the classical musical and opera repertoire was fair, and I knew the songbooks of Porter, Kern and Gershwin very well. But few of the musicals for which most of those songs were written had I ever seen. The secret truth was that I rather looked down on the whole genre. I made exceptions for Cabaret, My Fair Lady, West Side Story and Guys and Dolls, which I knew as films and records and rated highly. Singin’ in the Rain, Mary Poppins, Oliver! and The Sound of Music I knew and valued only as films and … well, that was about it, give or take the occasional Sunday-afternoon screening of a Fred Astaire or Gene Kelly classic on BBC2. Cats had been running in the West End for a year and a half, but I hadn’t seen it. Still haven’t. Must get round to it. Ditto Les Misérables, The Phantom of the Opera and Miss Saigon and all the others that have come and gone and come back again since. I don’t doubt that the loss is mine.

The director, Mike Ockrent, who had made his name with the presentation of new theatre writing mostly in the fringe venues of England and Scotland, knew the world of musicals even less well than I did. But we soon discovered, as we worked on the script of Me and My Girl, that we had here a project that owed nothing to Broadway and Hollywood and everything to music hall. Whether the revival succeeded or failed would depend on how ready a modern audience might be for the slapstick, silliness and cheeky bounce that the late music-hall style embodied.

As I went from draft to draft, David Aukin provided me with an invaluable lesson. For many years he had presided over the Hampstead Theatre, where he had nurtured Mike Leigh’s legendary Abigail’s Party as well as new plays by Dennis Potter, Michael Frayn, Harold Pinter and many others. When he saw my first draft, fresh from the daisy-wheel printer, he smiled.

‘Your job is to try and do yourself out of a job. The shorter the distance between musical numbers, the better.’

‘There’s just too much dialogue, isn’t there?’ I said.

‘Far too much.’

In the end I cut and cut and cut. I read, on somebody’s recommendation, The Street Where I Live, Alan Jay Lerner’s superb memoir of a Broadway lyricist and book writer’s life and work. When it is time for an emotional or narrative transformation in the action of a musical, Lerner maintained, that moment should be expressed not in spoken words, but in song or in dance, otherwise why are you creating a musical show in the first place and not a play? In a good musical the action doesn’t stop for a song – the songs are the action. I read this manifestly sound prescription, looked at my script thus far and realized that I had written nothing but a stop-start drama in which everything important happened in scenes of spoken dialogue that were from time to time halted for song and dance numbers. Douglas Furber and Arthur Rose, who had written the original book and lyrics, came from an era that preceded the Lerner manifesto. The stagecraft of the time allowed for chorus lines to shuffle on in front of a front-cloth while the scene was shifted behind. Modern theatre demanded visible changes that used trucking and flying and floating and other magical machine-driven techniques. Here Mike Ockrent was fantastically encouraging. He had read physics at university, briefly been an inventor and had a fine engineering mind.

‘Write the most extravagant and outrageous scene changes you can think of,’ he said. ‘We’ll make them work. But don’t write to save money. Between us the production designer and I will make it happen.’

For the next draft then, I went crazy. The show opened with a number called ‘A Weekend at Hareford’. I tweaked the lyrics a little and wrote stage directions that were, on the face of it, absurd. I described country-house weekenders singing the song in open chauffeur-driven cars as they made their way out of London, into the countryside, through the gates of Hareford Hall and up to the massive frontage, which would revolve and transform into an interior which the guests would enter to be greeted by the household servants. It was easy enough for me to write; let Martin Johns the designer and Mike Ockrent make of that what they would.

I cut dialogue as drastically as I could. The idea was to jump, as David Aukin had suggested, from musical number to musical number with as little dialogue as possible, but also to treat certain comic scenes – like the Lupino Lane cloak business to which Richard had alluded, as well as a seduction scene involving cushions and a sofa – as kinds of numbers in their own right. I also added two other well-known Noel Gay songs, ‘The Sun Has Got His Hat On’ and ‘Leaning On a Lamp-post’.

Mike visited me in Chichester to work through his notes on this draft. He relished every over-ambitious, absurd and impossible demand I had made on his ingenuity.

‘More,’ he said. ‘Let’s go even further!’

But why, you will be wanting to know, was I in Chichester?





Chichester 1

Early in 1982 Richard Armitage took me and Hugh to L’Escargot in Greek Street for lunch.

‘So that I get an idea of how best to shape your destinies,’ he said, ‘each of you should now tell me whose careers you most admire and whom you would most want to emulate.’

Hugh wondered if there was someone between Peter Ustinov and Clint Eastwood. Maybe with a hint of Mick Jagger thrown in.

Richard nodded, made a note in his black leather Smythson notebook and turned to me.

‘Alan Bennett,’ I said. ‘Definitely Alan Bennett.’

I was too young to have seen Bennett’s television comedy On The Margin, the tapes of which the BBC had shamefully wiped within weeks of transmission, as was the practice in those days, but I had an audio recording of highlights, which I knew off by heart, as I did the sermon in Beyond the Fringe and his cottaging sketch from The Secret Policeman’s Other Ball. I had read but never seen his play Habeas Corpus and had once owned, then subsequently lost, a cassette tape of Forty Years On, in which he played a schoolmaster called Tempest. Those were enough for me to think him a hero. Talking Heads, A Private Function, An Englishman Abroad, The Madness of George III and The History Boys all lay many years in the future.

‘Alan Bennett, eh?’

Was it paranoia, or did I sense that Richard found my answer disappointing? Peter Cook and John Cleese were greater comedy stars with their almost rock and roll status and charisma, but Alan Bennett’s miniaturism, his frailty combined with his verbal touch and literary, almost academic, frames of reference appealed to me more as a role model. History has, of course, shown that his kind of career path was as unattainable for me as Cook’s and Cleese’s, but a man’s reach should exceed his grasp, or what’s a heaven for?

A year after this lunch, round about the time Gossip was getting into financial trouble and I was working on the first drafts of Me and My Girl in between sweaty bouts of not coming up with Alfresco 2 material with Hugh, Richard called me up.

‘Ha!’ he said. ‘You’re going to like this. Be at the Garrick Theatre on Thursday afternoon at half past three to audition for Patrick Garland and John Gale. Prepare the part of Tempest in Forty Years On.’

‘W-w-w-w …?’

‘It’s for the Chichester Festival next April.’

‘P-p-p-p-p …’

‘Good luck.’

Alan Bennett’s very own part. And to be directed by the same man who directed the original production in nineteen sixty-whenever it was. I leapt for the bookshelf. I knew I had a copy somewhere, but it must have been in a box in my parents’ house in Norfolk or in that indeterminate place where lost teenage property goes, all those favourite records, wall-posters and pullovers that you never see again. I streaked over to John Sandoe’s, where the assistant was quite sure they had a copy if only he could lay his hands on it, now just let him think … I almost screamed with impatience as he hunted with maddening deliberation and cheerfulness.

‘Here we are. Our only copy. A little grubby I’m afraid – you can have it for a pound.’

I spent the next few hours reacquainting myself with this, Alan Bennett’s first full-length dramatic work. Forty Years On is set in a fictional school called Albion House, which is mounting its annual school play, this year a specially devised pageant performed by staff and boys called ‘Speak for England, Arthur’. This play-within-a-play takes a family through the World Wars by way of a dazzling series of sketches, monologues and parodies that manage to combine, in that uniquely Bennett way, the joyously comic with the mournfully elegiac. The original production, which starred John Gielgud as the headmaster, Paul Eddington as the senior master and Alan Bennett as the drippy junior master Tempest, was a huge success from the very beginning. The school’s name, Albion House, alerted the audience to the possibility, never overstretched, that it might perhaps stand as a symbol of England itself.

I learned off by heart Tempest’s ‘Confirmation Class’, in which he attempts to give a lesson on the facts of life.


TEMPEST: Those are called your private parts, Foster. And if anyone ever touches them, you are to say, ‘Those are my private parts and you’re not to touch them.’

FOSTER: Those are my private parts and you are not to touch them.

TEMPEST: It doesn’t apply to me, Foster! It doesn’t apply to me!


I also committed to memory a monologue in which Tempest plays a rather precious and faded literary figure recalling the great days of Bloomsbury.

With these and other scenes safely in my head I made my way by bus and Tube to the Garrick Theatre in the Charing Cross Road. I found the stage door, where I was greeted by a friendly young man who led me backstage to a little green room.

‘My name’s Michael,’ he said. ‘You’re a little early, so perhaps you wouldn’t mind waiting here while we just see some other people?’

I looked at my watch and saw that it was ten to three. Perhaps the appropriateness of the number of minutes early I was could be read as a good omen.

Forty minutes on I walked nervously on to the stage, a hand shading my eyes as I strained to see down into the auditorium.

‘Hello,’ said a neat, friendly and delicately precise voice, ‘I am Patrick, and this is John Gale, who runs the Chichester Festival Theatre.’

‘Hello,’ boomed a rich baritone from the dark.

‘And this,’ continued Patrick, ‘is Alan Bennett.’

The high tenor song of a cheery and attenuated Yorkshire ‘Hello’ floated up from the stalls and into my unbelieving ears. Alan Bennett? Here! At the audition! Every organ in my body screamed. A hammering came into my ears, and my knees turned to water. Alan Bennett?

I remember not one minute or second of the half hour that followed. I know I must have recited or read some scenes and I do recall stumbling through the London streets in an agony of despair and disappointment, so I must have said goodbye and left the theatre in some manner or other.

Richard Armitage called me up at the flat that evening. ‘How did it go, m’dear?’

‘Oh Richard it was awful, I was terrible. Appalling. Monstrous. Unspeakable. Alan Bennett was there! In the theatre.’

‘I don’t doubt it. Is that a bad thing?’

‘Well, it never occurred to me he’d be present. Never. I was tongue-tied, struck dumb. So nervous I could barely speak. Oh God, I was dreadful.’

‘I’m sure you can’t have been as bad as all that …’ He made the series of soothing and clucking noises that agents make to calm hysterical clients. They failed to console me.

The next day Lorraine rang. ‘Darling, could you go to the Garrick again at three o’clock for a recall?’

‘A recall?’

‘It means they want to see and hear you again.’

‘You mean they haven’t ruled me out?’

I arrived at the Garrick bang on the hour determined at least to try to override my nerves. Michael greeted me like an old friend and led me straight through to the stage. The house lights were up, and I looked out and could clearly see Patrick Garland and John Gale in the stalls but this time no Alan Bennett. A great wave of relief swept over me.

‘Hello again!’ Patrick called cheerily. ‘We were wondering if we might hear the Bloomsbury monologue this time?’

I sat and delivered.

‘Thank you!’ said Patrick. ‘Thank you … I think …’ He conferred with John Gale, nodded his head and looked down as if seeking inspiration from the floor. From where I stood he seemed to be whispering to the carpet. ‘Well, yes …’ he murmured. ‘I think so too.’ He looked up towards me with a smile and said in a louder voice. ‘Stephen, John and I would be very pleased to ask you to play the part of Tempest for our production. Would you like to do that?’

‘Would I? Oh, indeed I would!’ I said. ‘Thank you. Thank you so very, very much.’

‘That’s excellent news,’ said Patrick. ‘We’re delighted. Aren’t we?’ he added, to the carpet.

There was a sort of scuffling and scrabbling, and a figure rose from behind the seats where it had been crouching out of sight. The long, lean form of Alan Bennett unfolded itself with an apologetic cough. ‘Oh, yes,’ he said, brushing dust from the knees of his grey flannel trousers, ‘quite delighted.’

Patrick noted my bewilderment. ‘Your agent was kind enough to mention to us that Alan’s presence had made you a little nervous, so this time round he thought it might be best to conceal himself.’

Such consideration from a hero was almost more than I could bear. Naturally, being an arse, I expressed my gratitude by not managing to express any gratitude at all. To this day I do not think I have ever properly thanked Alan for his grace and sweetness that afternoon.





Crises of Confidence

Alan Bennett has a huge advantage over most of us in that his shyness is known about and expected; indeed it is one of the qualities most admired in him. It proves his authenticity, modesty and the classy distance he naturally keeps from that creepy media gang of loud, confident, shallow and self-congratulatory wankers to which I cannot but help belong and which the rest of society so rightly despises. Nobody seems to expect me to be shy, or believes me when I say that I am. I cannot blame them. I seem to move with such ease through the world. I was reminded of this only yesterday afternoon. I was a guest on the CBS programme The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson. Craig is the Scottish comedian who has now become, in the opinion of many, myself included, the best talk show host in America. He told me, as he began the interview, that back in the eighties, when he had been a regular on the British comedy circuit, he had always regarded me as almost unnaturally calm, sorted and in control, to the extent that he was in a kind of angry awe of me. I ought to be used to being told that, but yet again it brought me up short. Never, at any point in my life, can I remember feeling that I was any part of assured, controlled or at ease. The longer I live the more clearly one truth stands out. People will rarely modify their preferred view of a person, no matter what the evidence might suggest. I am English. Tweedy. Pukka. Confident. Establishment. Self-assured. In charge. That is how people like to see me, be the truth never so at variance. It may be the case that I am a Jewish mongrel with an addictive self-destructive streak that it has taken me years to master. It may be the case that my afflictions of mood and temperament cause me to be occasionally suicidal in outlook and can frequently leave me in despair and eaten up with self-hatred and self-disgust. It may be the case that I am chronically overmastered by a sense of failure, underachievement and a terrible knowledge that I have betrayed, abused or neglected the talents that nature bestowed upon me. It may be the case that I doubt I will ever have the capacity to be happy. It may be the case that I fear for my sanity, my moral centre and my very future. All these cases may be protested, and I can assert their truth as often as I like, but the repetition will not alter my ‘image’ by one pixel. It is the same image I had before I was a known public figure. The image that caused a delegation of college first-year contemporaries to visit me in my rooms and demand to know my ‘secret’. The image that satisfies and impresses some, enrages others and no doubt bores, provokes or irritates many more. I would be a tragic figure indeed if I had not learnt to live with that persona by now. Like many masks this smiling, placid one has become so tight a fit that it might be said to have rewritten the features of whatever true face once screamed behind it, were it not that it is just a mask and that the feelings underneath are as they always were.

What I want to say about all this wailing is not that I expect your pity or your understanding (although I wouldn’t throw either of them out of bed), but that perhaps I am the one actually offering pity and understanding here. For I have to believe that all the feelings I have described are not unique to me but common to us all. The sense of failure, the fear of eternal unhappiness, the insecurity, misery, self-disgust and the awful awareness of underachievement that I have described. Are you not prey to all those things also? I do hope so. I would feel the most conspicuous oddity otherwise. I grant that my moments of ‘suicidal ideation’ and swings of mood may be more extreme and pathological than most have to endure, but otherwise, I am surely describing nothing more than the fears, dreads and neuroses we all share? No? More or less? Mutatis mutandis? All things being equal? Oh, please say yes.

This is a problem many writers and comedians face: we possess the primary arrogance that persuades us that our insights, fixations and habits are for the most part shared characteristics that we alone have the boldness, insight and openness of mind to expose and name: we are privileged thereby, or so we congratulate ourselves, to be spokesmen for humanity. When a stand-up comic describes nose-picking or peeing in the shower or whatever it might be we can interpret our laughter as a ‘me too’ release which itself triggers more laughter: we laugh again because our initial laughter and that of the person sitting next to us in the audience proves our complicity and shared guilt. This much is obvious and a truism of observational comedy. On top of it there can also be laid, of course, that conscious game comics play in which they shuttle between those common, shared anxieties and ones that are very particular to them. And here I suppose we laugh at how different we are. How similar, but different. How the comic is living a more extreme life of neurosis and angst on our behalf. A kind of ‘thank God I’m not that weird’ laughter is the result. When a comic or a writer has established their credentials by revealing how much of what they do or feel is something we also do or feel, they can then go further and reveal depths of activity or feeling that we may not share, that might revolt us or that perhaps we do share but would much rather not have dragged up into the light. And of course, comics, being what they are, appreciate that point.

It is common enough to hear this kind of routine: ‘You know, ladies and gentlemen, you know when you’re sat watching television and you stick your finger up your arse and wiggle it about? … No? Oh, right. It must be just me then. Sorry about that. Oops. Moving on …’ Well, with an average stand-up comic talking about physical things like peeing in the shower and nose- or arse-picking it is easy enough to see the distinction between what is communal and what is individual. But those are discrete identifiable actions of which one is either ‘guilty’ or not. Some people pee in the shower, others do not. I have to confess that I do. I try to be good and refrain from doing so in somebody else’s shower, but otherwise I am guiltless about what seems to me to be a logical, reasonable and hygienically unexceptionable act. I also pick my nose. I will stop the confession right there for fear of embarrassing you or myself further. You can decide whether to put the book down now and say to the vacant air: ‘I too pick my nose and pee in the shower.’ Plenty of people do neither. They are likely, I hope, to forgive those of us who are less fastidious in our habits. But in either case whether or not they do is not susceptible to interpretation. But feelings … I may know whether or not I pick my nose but do I really know whether or not I feel a failure? I may be aware that I often feel bleak and unhappy or filled with nameless dread, but am I right to interpret these feelings as a sense of moral deficiency or personal inadequacy or any such thing? The root of the feeling may after all be a hormonal imbalance, heartburn, a triggered unconscious memory, too little sunlight, a bad dream, anything. As with colour sense or pain sensitivity we can never know whether any of our perceptions and sensations are the same as others’. So it may very well be that I am just a great big cissy and that my miseries and worries are nothing compared to yours. Or perhaps I am the bravest man on the planet and that, if any of you were to experience a tenth of the sorrows I daily endure, you would scream in agony. But just as we can all agree on what is red, even if we will never know if we each see it in the same way, so we can all agree – can’t we? – that no matter how confident we may appear to others, inside we are all sobbing, scared and uncertain for much of the time. Or perhaps it’s just me.

Oh God, perhaps it really is just me.

Actually it doesn’t really matter, when you come to think of it. If it is just me, then you are reading the story of some weird freak. You are free to treat this book like science fiction, fantasy or exotic travel literature. Are there really men like Stephen Fry on this planet? Goodness, how alien some people are. And if I am not alone, then neither are you, and hand in hand we can marvel together at the strangeness of the human condition.





Celebrity

Aside from University Challenge, the BBC’s transmission of The Cellar Tapes was the first time I had appeared on national television. I don’t count There’s Nothing to Worry About, which was inflicted only upon viewers in the north-west ITV region.

The morning after The Cellar Tapes was aired on BBC2 I went for a walk along the King’s Road. How ought I to treat those who approached me? I switched on a sweet gentle smile and practised a kind of ‘Who? … me?’ gesture that involved looking behind me and then pointing with questioning disbelief at my own undeserving chest. I made sure, before setting out, that there were pens in my pocket as well as some artfully random scraps of paper for autographs. Would I write ‘Yours sincerely’ or ‘With best wishes’? I decided that I should try each a few times and see which looked better.



Photo call in Richmond Park for BBC version of The Cellar Tapes.



The same: ultimately a git with a pipe stuck in his face.

The first people I passed as I made my way up Blacklands Terrace were an elderly couple who paid me no attention. Foreigners possibly, or the kind of Chelseaites who thought it smart not to have a television. A young woman came towards me with a West Highland terrier on a lead. I added an extra 10 per cent of soupy modesty to my sweet gentle smile and awaited her gasps and shrieks. She and the terrier passed right by without a flicker of recognition. How very strange. I turned left at the King’s Road and walked past the Peter Jones department store and twice around Sloane Square. Not one person stopped me, shot me a sideways glance of admiring recognition or favoured me with a single puzzled stare that told me that they knew the face but couldn’t quite place it. There was simply no reaction from anyone anywhere. I went into W. H. Smith’s and hung around the periodicals section, close to the piles of listings magazines. To pick up a Radio Times people had to ask me to step aside; obviously and by definition these persons must have been television watchers, but my features, by now set into a wild, despairing grin, meant nothing to them. This was most strange. Television, everybody in the world knew, conferred instant fame. One morning you do the weather on BBC1, the next you are besieged at the supermarket checkout queue. Instead I had woken up to find myself anonymous. I was still nothing more than another face in the London crowd. Maybe almost no one had watched the Footlights show? Or maybe millions had, but I possessed one of those bland, forgettable faces that meant I was doomed never to be recognized. Surely this was unlikely? I had told my face a lot of tough and unforgiving truths in the past, but I had never accused it of being bland or forgettable.

I pulled a compensatory BBC Micro magazine from the shelf and left. As I was trailing disappointedly back to the flat I heard a voice behind me.

‘Excuse me, excuse me!’

I turned to see an excited young girl. At last. ‘Yes?’

‘You forgot your change.’

Here are the first lines of Love’s Labour’s Lost:


Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,

Live register’d upon our brazen tombs,

And then grace us in the disgrace of death.


That is the King of Navarre’s opening speech, the one Hugh had such trouble with in the 1981 Marlowe Society production. It is a fine sentiment, but nothing could run more counter to the way the world thinks today. It certainly seems that all still hunt after fame, but how many are content for it to come only in the form of a tombstone inscription? They want it now. And that is how I wanted it too. Ever since I can remember I had dreamt of being famous. I know how embarrassing an admission this is. I could attempt to dress it up in finer words, imputing and inferring intricate psychological grounds, implicating and adducing complex developmental causations that elevated the condition into a syndrome, but there is no point dressing it up in fine linen. From the first moment I was aware of such a class of person existing, I had wanted to be a celebrity. We are forever telling ourselves that we live in a celebrity-obsessed culture; many hands are daily wrung at the supremacy of appearance over achievement, status over substance and image over industry. To desire fame argues a shallow and delusional outlook. This much we all know. But if we clever ones can see so clearly that fame is a snare and a delusion, we can also see just as clearly that as each year passes a greater and greater proportion of the western world’s youth is becoming entramelled in that snare and dazzled by that delusion.

We have in our minds a dreadful picture of the thousands who audition so pitifully for television talent shows and whose heads seem always to be buried in garish celebrity magazines. We feel sorrow and contempt for the narrow dimensions of their lives. We excoriate a society that is all surface and image. Teenaged girls in particular, we suggest, are slaves to body-image and fashion fantasies, they are junkies on the fame drug. How can our culture be so broken and so sick, we wonder, as to raise up as objects of veneration a raft of talentless nobodies who offer no moral, spiritual or intellectual sustenance and no discernible gifts beyond over-hygienic eroticism and unthreatening photogeneity?

I would offer the usual counters to that. Firstly, the phenomenon simply is not as new as everyone thinks it is. That there are more outlets, pipelines, conduits and means of transmitting and receiving news and images is obvious, but read any novel published in the early part of the twentieth century and you will find female uneducated characters who spend their spare moments dreaming of movie stars, tennis-players, explorers, racing-drivers and barnstorming aviators. You’ll find these dreamy shop-girls and head-in-the-clouds housemaids in Evelyn Waugh, Agatha Christie, P. G. Wodehouse and every genre in between. The propensity to worship idols is not new. Nor is the wrathful contempt of those who believe that they alone understand the difference between false gods and true. In the story of the Ten Commandments I was always on the side of Aaron. I liked his golden calf. Biblical colour plates for children showed it garlanded with flowers, revelling idolaters dancing happily around it, clashing cymbals and embracing each other with wild, abandoned joy. The music and the hugs were clinching proof (especially the cymbals) in the minds of the Victorian illustrators that Aaron’s followers were debauched, degenerate, decadent and doomed to eternal damnation. With the party in full swing, Moses returns with those fatuous tablets tucked under his arm, dashes them petulantly to the ground, melts the golden calf and grinds it to powder, which he mixes into a drink that he forces all the Israelites to swallow. Next, being such a holy man of God, he slays 3,000 men before hauling his vengeful arse back up Mount Sinai to get a second batch of commandments. I think we can celebrate the fact that we now live in a culture, flawed or not, that instantly sees that, while Aaron may be a weak voluptuary, his brother is a dangerous fanatic. The gilt bull beats the guilty bullshit any way you choose to look at it. We humans are naturally disposed to worship gods and heroes, to build our pantheons and valhallas. I would rather see that impulse directed into the adoration of daft singers, thicko footballers and air-headed screen actors than into the veneration of dogmatic zealots, fanatical preachers, militant politicians and rabid cultural commentators.

Secondly, is it not a rule in life that no one is quite as stupid as we would like them to be? Spokesmen across the political divide from us are smarter than we would have them, mad mullahs and crazy nationalists are nothing like as dumb as we would wish. Film producers, shock jocks, insurgents, journalists, American military – all kinds of people we might reasonably expect to write off as mentally negligible have cunning, insight and intellect well beyond what is comfortable for us. This inconvenient truth extends to those on whom we lavish our patronizing pity too. If the social-networking services of the digital age teach us anything it is that only a fool would underestimate the intelligence, intuition and cognitive skills of the ‘masses’. I am talking about more than the ‘wisdom of crowds’ here. If you look beyond sillinesses like the puzzling inability of the majority to distinguish between your and you’re, its and it’s and there, they’re and their (all of which distinctions have nothing to do with language, only with grammar and orthographical convention: after all logic and consistency would suggest the insertion of a genitival apostrophe in the pronominal possessive its, but convention has decided, perhaps to avoid confusion with the elided it is, to dispense with one), if, as I say, you look beyond such pernickety pedantries, you will see that it is possible to be a fan of reality TV, talent shows and bubblegum pop and still have a brain. You will also see that a great many people know perfectly well how silly and camp and trivial their fandom is. They do not check in their minds when they enter a fan site. Judgement is not necessarily fled to brutish beasts, and men have not quite lost their reason. Which is all a way of questioning whether pop-culture hero worship is really so psychically damaging, so erosive of the cognitive faculties, so corrupting of the soul of mankind as we are so often told.

Thirdly, look at the kind of people who most object to the childishness and cheapness of celebrity culture. Does one really want to side with such apoplectic and bombastic bores? I should know, I often catch myself being one, and it isn’t pretty. I will defend the absolute value of Mozart over Miley Cyrus, of course I will, but we should be wary of false dichotomies. You do not have to choose between one or the other. You can have both. The human cultural jungle should be as varied and plural as the Amazonian rainforest. We are all richer for biodiversity. We may decide that a puma is worth more to us than a caterpillar, but surely we can agree that the habitat is all the better for being able to sustain each. Monocultures are uninhabitably dull and end as deserts.

Against all that it might be said that the quarrel is not with harmless idolatry. The problem, some would argue, is not that everybody worships celebrity, but they want it for themselves. Online user-generated content and the rise of the talent show and reality TV have bred a generation for whom it is not enough to flick through fan magazines, they want their own shot at stardom. They want, moreover, to go straight to fame and fortune, short-circuiting tedious considerations like hard work and talent. Well, we all know how satisfying it is to recite the shortcomings and hollowness of others – especially those who have money and recognition where we have none. It is certainly more pleasurable than inspecting our own shortcomings. I dare say we do live in a cheap age, an age where the things that should have value are little prized and things that are empty of worth are too highly rated. But who on earth could think for a second that this is new to our race? Anyone familiar with Aristophanes, Martial, Catullus, Shakespeare, Jonson, Dryden, Johnson, Pope, Swift … You get the point. It has always been the case, since humans could first record their thoughts, that the ‘wrong people’ have been seen to have arrived at the highest positions. The emperors, kings, aristocrats, ruling classes and gentry, the arrivistes, parvenus and nouveaux riches, the financiers, merchant princes and industrialists, the artists, designers, literati and cultural elite, the actors, sportsmen, television stars, pop singers and presenters, they have all been unfairly elevated to positions they do not deserve. ‘In a just and properly ordered world,’ the angry ones wail, ‘I should be up there too, but I am too proud to say so, so I shall carp and snipe and rant with indignation and show my contempt for the whole boiling. But deep inside I want to be recognized. I just want to count.’

I was like that all through my teenage years and early twenties. Desperate to be famous but very, very ready, if I didn’t make it, to vent my scorn on those who did. I contend that people like me who burn for fame and recognition are much rarer than the prevailing view would have us believe. I take my brother Roger and his family as my touchstone for all that is sane, sound and decent. They are as modern and connected to the world as anyone else I know. I recall, and I seem to be able to picture it in pin-sharp high-def widescreen 3D detail, an evening at the pantomime in Norwich when I was seven and Roger was nine. Buttons made his entrance and asked if there were any boys and girls out there who would like to join him up on stage. Roger dropped down in his seat trying his hardest to look invisible. The idea of being up there in the lights in front of a staring audience horrified him. I meanwhile was leaping up and down thrusting my hand into the air desperate, absolutely desperate to be picked. Two boys, eighteen months apart in age, bred in the same conditions and by the same parents. There are many more Rogers in the world, praise be, than Stephens.

Maybe the childish desire for attention I felt then is all of a piece with my childish desire for sweet things. The desire to be famous is infantile, and humanity has never lived in an age when infantilism was more sanctioned and encouraged than now. Infantile foods in the form of crisps, chips, sweet fizzy drinks and pappy burgers or hot dogs smothered in sugary sauce are considered mainstream nutrition for millions of adults. Intoxicating drinks disguised as milkshakes and soda pops exist for those whose taste buds haven’t grown up enough to enjoy the taste of alcohol. As in food so in the wider culture. Anything astringent, savoury, sharp, complex, ambiguous or difficult is ignored in favour of the colourful, the sweet, the hollow and the simple. I know that fame to me, when I was a child, was much like candy-floss. It looked magical, it was huge and dramatic and attention-grabbing. It is tempting to write here and now that, like candy-floss, fame turned out to be little more than air on a stick and that the small part of it that has substance was cloying, sick-making and corrosive to me, but I shall keep such thoughts, if I truly have them, for later. I am, thus far in my story, not famous at all and I cannot yet tell what fame is like – only that it is a condition I long for.

In fact, I think few people are really obsessed with being famous in the way that I was. Most recoil at the thought, squirming down in their seats like my brother at the very idea of public exposure. They might consider from time to time what fame would be like and conduct thought experiments in which they feature on a red carpet being lit by flashbulbs, but that is no more than the normal fantasy of opening the batting for England or volleying the championship point at Wimbledon. For the most part, most people are mostly for a quiet life out of the public eye and have a mostly sane understanding of how peculiar fame must be. They are sensible enough not to judge all celebrities as alike and civil enough not to despise people because they have committed the crime of being a pop singer, a golfer or a politician. Most people are tolerant, wise, kind and thoughtful. Most of the time. People like me eaten up with ambition, simmering with resentment, white-hot with neediness at one moment and sullen with frustration and disappointment the next, we are the ones who obsess about fame and status, and it gives us nothing but dissatisfaction, vexation and horrible doses of heavy angst.

All this is embarrassing for me to admit. Those in my line do not own up to such vulgar, cheesy and undignified yearnings. It is all about the work. If your work happens, unlike insurance, accountancy or teaching, to bring celebrity in its train, or riches, then so be it. You aim for the game bird of accomplishment; fame and fortune just happen to be the feathers it flies with. Yeah, right. We know these worthy precepts, I echo and endorse them. But the needy child that hid within the tweedy man screamed to be fed and the needy child, as always, wanted what was instantly satisfying and instantly rewarding, no matter how shallow and devious that might make him. Shallow and devious is what I was (and probably always will be), and if you have not yet understood how profoundly shallow and how straightforwardly devious I am, then I cannot have been doing my job right.

Work was coming in thick and fast. The musical, the play, the film script and a thick miscellany of writing and radio assignments to which we might come in a moment. There is no doubt that amongst magazine and newspaper editors, radio, film and TV producers, directors, commissioners and casting agents I was a coming man, a young shaver useful for all kinds of odds and ends. But I was not famous. A few invitations to film premieres and first nights began to trickle in, but I found that I could walk the red carpet entirely unmolested. I remember going to some event with Rowan Atkinson, the press night of a new play, I think. To hear his name shouted out by photographers and see the crowd of fans pressing up against the crash barriers caused the most intense excitement in me, combined with a sick flood of fury and resentment that no one, not one single person, recognized me or wanted my picture. Oh, Stephen. I have clicked on and selected that sentence, deleted it, restored it, deleted it and restored it again. A large part of me would rather not have you know that I am so futile, fatuous and feeble-minded, but an even larger part recognizes that this is our bargain. I cannot speak for others or presume to drag out their entrails for public inspection, but I can speak for (and against) myself. Maybe I was an advance guard for a new kind of Briton: fanatical about fame, addictive, superficial, gadget-obsessed and determinedly infantile. Maybe, to put a kinder construction on it, I was living proof that you could want to be famous and want to do the work, you could relish the red carpet and relish lucubrating into the early hours, cranking out articles, scripts, sketches and scenarios with a genuine sense of pleasure and fulfilment.





Commercials, Covent Garden, Compact Discs, Cappuccinos and Croissants

On top of the major projects in film and television there tumbled in other requests for work of all kinds. Lo Hamilton at Noel Gay Artists fielded these and passed them on. I think I understood that I had the option to refuse, to turn down, to inquire further, but I cannot recall that I ever did. When I look back at this time it seems to be a paradise of variety without pressure and novelty without nerves. Everything was fantastically new, exciting, flattering and appealing.

Sometimes together and sometimes apart, Hugh and I found ourselves inside the world of the commercial voiceover. Neither of us yet had the kind of vocal heft that afforded us the chance to do the really sexy part of the work, the endline – that final slogan which was most usually the province of either hard-smoking and-drinking fifty-year-olds like the legendary Bill Mitchell, whose vocal chords had the deep, authoritative resonance that carried the advertiser’s message home, or of vocal magicians like Martin Jarvis, Ray Brooks, Enn Reitel and Michael Jayston, who were in such heavy demand that they carried little pagers clipped to their belts so that their agents could push them from job to job at the shortest notice. I remember David Jason, another very busy and talented voice artist, showing me how they worked. They did no more than beep, which was a signal to phone the agent, but I was hugely impressed. One day, I told myself, I would own such an object and I would treasure it always. Somewhere I have a drawer filled with at least a dozen old pagers in assorted stylings and colourways. None of them is treasured; they were barely used at all.

At our level Hugh and I were required usually to do silly comedy characters for radio ads, a huge new booming industry that was taking advantage of the proliferation of independent radio stations that were popping up all over Britain throughout the early eighties as a result of ‘second tranche’ franchise contracts. It is very beguiling to look back at a period of time and imagine that one was happy then, but I really believe that we were. Life in the glass booth was simple but presented pleasing challenges. Often an engineer or producer would press the talk-back button and say something like, ‘Yeah, that was two seconds over. Can you do it again, shaving off three seconds, but don’t go any quicker.’ That kind of apparently absurd request starts to make sense after a while and Hugh and I both took great pride in our ability to make good on them. An internal clock starts to build itself in the brain so that within a short time we were both able to say, ‘That was bang on, wasn’t it? Maybe half a second under?’ or ‘Damn, at least thirty-five, that one, we’ll go again …’ and be proved right when the engineer played it back with a stopwatch. A trivial skill, the proud acquisition of which some might think a waste of an elite and expensive education, but I know, as I have said, that we were happy. How do I know? Well, we said so. We actually dared to say it.

In those days the studios we found ourselves in most often were those of Angell Sound in Covent Garden, opposite the stage door of the Royal Opera House. Hugh and I would emerge from a session, blink in the bright sunshine of the day, say ‘Shirt’ and walk south-west along Floral Street, crossing James Street until we reached Paul Smith’s. At that time this was the great designer’s sole London presence. Perhaps he had a shop in his native Nottingham, but the Floral Street branch was certainly the only one in London. Like David Jason he is now a knight, but back then Paul Smith was just beginning to achieve a name as the designer of choice for men who were shortly to be dubbed ‘yuppie’. His reputation, unlike that of the yuppie, has emerged unscathed from such a calamitous calumny. In the early to mid-eighties the first noises of what was to be the post-Big-Bang, newly enriched, newly confident professional classes were beginning to be heard as they clamoured for stylish socks, shirts, croissants, frothy coffee and – God help us all – conspicuous braces. I suppose Hugh and I fell into a subset of this new category.

One morning as we emerged from Angell’s I distinctly remember us having a conversation that went something like this:

‘Bloody hell, this is the life.’

‘We are so fucking lucky.’

‘Twenty minutes in a studio, not a minute more.’

‘No rope was older and no money … moneyer.’

‘We should buy a shirt to celebrate.’

‘We should always buy a shirt to celebrate.’

‘And then maybe a CD or two.’

‘And then definitely a CD or two.’

‘Perhaps followed by a coffee and a croissant.’

‘Certainly followed by a coffee and a croissant.’

‘You know, I bet we will look back on these as the best days of our lives.’

‘When we’re old, fat, bitter and unhappy alcoholics, we will remember when we would saunter into a voiceover studio, saunter out again and buy a shirt and a CD and go to a café and have a croissant and a cappuccino.’

We have so far missed becoming alcoholics, and Hugh has never been fat. I am not sure if we are bitter, but we are certainly old-ish, and I think each of us would admit that the realization that we were unlikely to be as happy again was accurate. We really can look back and see those days as perfect. Intensely acute moments of love and parenthood and achievement might, and did, come to one or other of us at different times, but never again would we experience such a period of chronic content. We wanted nothing, we were slowly earning reputations and money without being crushed by celebrity and riches. Life was good. The most unusual aspect of it is that we knew it at the time. If you tell a schoolchild that they are currently experiencing what they will look back on as the best years of their lives, they will tell you, if they favour you with anything more than a black look, that is, that you are talking crap.

London was extraordinarily exciting to me. The CDs, cappuccinos and croissants were the acme of sophistication and symbolic of the great social and political sea change that was coming. The process of gentrification that was already beginning to remodel the seedier parts of Islington and Fulham was being contemptuously described as ‘croissantification’ by those alarmed at the incoming tide. The Falklands Conflict had transformed Margaret Thatcher from the least popular prime minister in fifty years to the most popular since Churchill. A surge of patriotism and confidence was beginning to swell in the political seas. It would soon enough become a tsunami of conspicuous spending for the lucky ones who rode high on the wave and a deluge of debt and deprivation for the victims of ‘the harsh realities of the marketplace’, as Keith Joseph and the Friedmanites liked to call monetarism’s collateral damage. I wish I could say I was more politically alert, angry or interested at this time. Smoky, boozy nights up in the bar of the Midland Hotel with Ben Elton had gone a long way towards pulling me out of my instinctive dread and dislike of the Labour party; the sheer vulgarity and graceless meanness of spirit of Margaret Thatcher and so many of her ministers made it very hard to feel any affection or admiration for her, but my eyes were too firmly fixed inwards towards myself and the opportunities coming my way to think much about anything else. If I colaphize myself too drastically for such an unremarkable and venial failing in one so young it would sound unconvincing. After the teenage years that I had undergone, I find it hard to blame myself for taking pleasure in the fruits that the world now showered down upon my head.





Crystal Cube

Aside from the individual assignments that had come my way – the musical, the film and the offer of a part in Forty Years On – Hugh and I wanted to continue writing and performing together. The spanking to our self-confidence administered by Ben’s astounding prolificacy notwithstanding, we still hoped (and somewhere inside ourselves believed) that we might have a future in comedy. Accordingly, Richard Armitage sent us to a meeting at the BBC.

In those days the house of Light Entertainment was divided into two departments, Comedy and Variety. Sitcoms and sketch shows flew under the Comedy flag and programmes like The Generation Game and The Paul Daniels Magic Show counted as Variety. The head of Light Entertainment was a jolly, red-faced man who could easily be mistaken for a Butlin’s Redcoat or the model for a beery husband in a McGill seaside postcard. His name was Jim Moir, which also happens to be Vic Reeves’s real name, although at this time, somewhere in 1983, Vic Reeves had yet to make his mark. Hugh and I had first met the executive Jim Moir at the cricket weekend at Stebbing. He had said then, with the assured timing of a Blackpool front-of-curtain comic: ‘Meet the wife, don’t laugh.’

Hugh and I were shown into his office. He sat us down on the sofa opposite his desk and asked if we had comedy plans. Only he wouldn’t have put it as simply as that, he probably said something like: ‘Strip naked and show me your cocks,’ which would have been his way of saying: ‘What would you like to talk about?’ Jim routinely used colourful and perplexing metaphors of a quite staggeringly explicit nature. ‘Let’s jizz on the table, mix up our spunk and smear it all over us,’ might be his way of asking, ‘Shall we work together?’ I had always assumed that he only spoke like that to men, but not so long ago Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders confirmed that he had been quite as eye-watering in his choice of language with them. Ben Elton went on to create, and Mel Smith to play, a fictional head of Light Entertainment based on Jim Moir called Jumbo Whiffy in the sitcom Filthy Rich & Catflap. I hope you will not get the wrong impression of Moir from my description of his language. People of his kind are easy to underestimate, but I never heard anyone who worked with him say a bad word about him. In the past forty years the BBC has had no more shrewd, capable, loyal, honourable and successful executive and certainly none with a more dazzling verbal imagination.

Hugh and I emerged from our meeting stupefied but armed with a commission. John Kilby, who had directed The Cellar Tapes, would direct and produce the pilot show that we were now to write. We conceived a series that was to be called The Crystal Cube, a mock-serious magazine programme that for each edition would investigate some phenomenon or other: every week we would ‘go through the crystal cube’. Hugh, Emma, Paul Shearer and I were to be the regulars and we would call upon a cast of semi-regular guests to play other parts.



The Crystal Cube, with Emma and Hugh.



The Crystal Cube. The warty look was created using Rice Krispies. True story.

Back in Manchester filming Alfresco, we began to write in our spare time. Freed from the intimidation of having to match Ben’s freakish fecundity, we produced our script in what was for us short order but would for Ben have constituted an intolerable writer’s block. It was rather good. I feel I can say this as the BBC chose not to commission a series: given that and my archetypical British pride in failure it hardly seems like showing off for me to say that I was pleased with it. It is out there now somewhere on YouTube, as most things are. If you happen to track it down you will find that the first forty seconds are inaudible, but it soon clears up. Aside from technical embarrassments there is also a good deal wrong with it comically, you will note. We are awkward, young and often incompetent, but nonetheless there are some perfectly good ideas in it struggling for light and air. John Savident, now well known for his work in Coronation Street, makes a splendid Bishop of Horley, Arthur Bostrom, who went on to play the bizarrely accented Officer ‘Good moaning’ Crabtree in ’Allo ’Allo!, guested as an excellently gormless genetic guinea-pig, and Robbie Coltrane was his usual immaculate self in the guise of a preposterously macho film-maker.

If I was disappointed, upset or humiliated by the BBC’s decision not to pick up The Crystal Cube, I was too proud to show it. Besides, there were plenty of comedy and odd jobs for me to be getting on with in the meantime. One such was collaborating with Rowan Atkinson on a screenplay for David Puttnam. The idea was an English Monsieur Hulot’s Holiday in which Rowan, an innocent abroad, would find himself unwittingly involved in some sort of crime caper. The character was essentially Mr Bean, but ten years too early.

I drove up to stay with Rowan and his girlfriend, Leslie Ash, in between visits to Manchester for the taping of Alfresco 2. The house in Oxfordshire was, I have to confess, a dazzling symbol to me of the prizes that comedy could afford. The Aston Martin in the driveway, the wisteria growing up the mellow ashlar walls of the Georgian façade, the cottage in the grounds, the tennis court, the lawns and orchards running down to the river – all this seemed so fantastically grand, so imponderably grown-up and out of reach.

We would sit in the cottage, and I would tap away on the BBC Micro that I had brought along with me. We composed a scene in which a French girl teaches Rowan’s character this tongue-twister: ‘Dido dined, they say, off the enormous back of an enormous turkey,’ which goes, in French, ‘Dido dîna, dit-on, du dos dodu d’un dodu dindon.’ Rowan practised the Beanish character earnestly attempting this. In any spare moment in the film, we decided, he would try out his ‘doo doo doo doo doo’, much to the bafflement of those about him. It is about all I remember from the film, which over the next few months quietly, as 99 per cent of all film projects do, fizzled out. Meanwhile, journalism was taking up more and more of my time.





Columnist

Britain’s magazine industry started to boom in the early to mid-eighties. Tatler, Harper’s & Queen and the newly revivified Vanity Fair, what you might call the Princess Di sector, fed the public appetite for information about the affairs of the Sloane Rangers, the stylings of their kitchens and country houses and the guest-lists of their parties. Vogue and Cosmopolitan rode high for the fashion-conscious and sexually sophisticated, City Limits and Time Out sold everywhere, and Nick Logan’s The Face dominated youth fashion and trendy style at a time when it was still trendy to use the word trendy. A few years later Logan proved that even men read glossies when he launched the avant-la-lettre metrosexual Arena. I wrote a number of articles for that magazine, and literary reviews for the now defunct Listener, a weekly published by the BBC.

The Listener’s editor when I first joined was Russell Twisk, a surname of such surpassing beauty that I would have written pieces for him if he had been at the helm of Satanic Child-Slaughter Monthly. His literary editor was Lynne Truss, later to achieve great renown as the author of Eats, Shoots and Leaves. I cannot remember that I was ever victim of her peculiar ‘zero tolerance approach to punctuation’; perhaps she corrected my copy without ever letting me know.

Twisk was replaced some time later by Alan Coren, who had been a hero of mine since his days editing Punch. He suggested I write a regular column rather than book reviews, and for a year or so I submitted weekly articles on whatever subjects suggested themselves to me.

By now I had bought myself a fax machine. For the first year or so of my ownership of this new and enchanting piece of technology it sat unloved and unused on my desk. I didn’t know anyone else who owned one, and the poor thing had nobody to talk to. To be the only person you know with a fax machine is a little like being the only person you know with a tennis racket.





Cryptic in Connecticut

One day (I’m fast forwarding here, but it seems the right place for this story) Mike Ockrent called me up. Me and My Girl was by this time running in the West End, and we had all been thrilled to hear that Stephen Sondheim and Hal Prince had been to see it and had written to Mike expressing their admiration.

‘I told Sondheim that you have a fax machine,’ Mike said.

‘Right.’ I was not sure what to make of this. ‘I see … er … why exactly?’

‘He asked me if I knew anybody who had one. You were the only person I could think of. He’s going to call you. Is that all right?’

The prospect of Stephen Sondheim, lyricist of West Side Story, composer of Sunday in the Park with George, Merrily We Roll Along, Company, Sweeney Todd and A Little Night Music, calling me up was, yes, on the whole, perfectly all right, I assured Mike. ‘What is it about exactly?’

‘Oh, he’ll explain …’

My God, oh my good gracious heavens. He wanted me to write the book of his next musical! What else could it be? Oh my holy trousers. Stephen Sondheim, the greatest songwriter-lyricist since Cole Porter, was going to call me up. Strange that he was interested in my possession of a fax machine. Perhaps that is how he imagined we would work together. Me faxing dialogue and story developments to him and him faxing back his thoughts and emendations. Now that I came to think of it that was rather a wonderful idea and opened up a whole new way of thinking about collaboration.

That evening the phone rang. I was living in Dalston in a house I shared with Hugh and Katie and I had warned them that I would be sitting on the telephone all night.

‘Hi, is that Stephen Fry?’

‘S-s-speaking.’

‘This is Stephen Sondheim.’

‘Right. Yes of course. Wow. Yes. It’s a … I …’

‘Hey, I want to congratulate you on the fine job you did with the book of Me and My Girl. Great show.’

‘Gosh. Thank you. Coming from you that’s … that’s …’

‘So. Listen, I understand you have a fax machine?’

‘I do. Yes. Certainly. Yes, a Brother F120. Er, not that the model number matters at all. A bit even. No. But, yes. I have one. Indeed. Mm.’

‘Are you at home this weekend?’

‘Er, yes I think so … yup.’

‘In the evening, till late at night?’

‘Yes.’

This was getting weird.

‘OK, so here’s the deal. I have a house in the country and I like to have treasure hunts and competitions. You know, with sneaky clues?’

‘Ri-i-ght …’

‘And I thought how great it would be to have a clue that was a long number. Your fax number? And when people get the answer they will see that it’s a number and maybe they will work out that it’s a phone number and they will call it, but they will get that sound. You know, the sound that a fax machine makes?’

‘Right …’

‘And they will hear it and think, “What was that?” but maybe one of them, they will know that it is in actuality a fax machine. They might have one in their office, for example. So they’ll say, “Hey, that’s a fax machine. So maybe we have to send it a message. On a piece of paper.” And they will fax you for help.’

‘And what do I do then?’

‘Well, here’s the thing: beforehand, I will have faxed you their next clue. So when they fax you asking for help, you fax that clue back in return. You understand?’

‘Yes, I think so. You send me a fax which is the next clue. Then I wait by the machine on Saturday afternoon …’

‘Evening, night. It will be afternoon in Connecticut, but in London it will be like nine, ten, maybe eleven o’clock. You’re not going out at all?’

‘No, no.’

‘Because it is crucial that you are in all the time and that you are right by the fax machine so you can hear it when it goes off.’

‘Absolutely. I’ll be there. So, just to make sure I’ve got this right. Saturday night I wait by the fax machine. When I get a fax asking me for a clue, I send to your fax number in Connecticut whatever it is that you will have faxed me earlier?’

‘Right. Isn’t it great? It will be the first-ever fax treasure hunt. But you have to be by the phone all Saturday night. You will be?’

‘I’ll be there. I’ll be there.’

‘OK. I’ll give you my fax number. It should appear on the top of the fax anyway, but I’ll give it to you. And I’ll need your fax number.’

We exchanged numbers.

‘Thank you, Stephen.’

‘No, thank you, Stephen.’

Between that call and Saturday evening he called four or five times to check that I had not changed my plans and was still happy to sit by the fax machine and await developments. On Saturday afternoon at about four I received a fax from him. It was an impenetrable diagram with some sort of code written alongside it.

I faxed back a note to say that I had received his clue and would fax it as soon as I received a request from his treasure-hunt contestants.

I sat with a book, ears flapping, for the next five hours. I had not put out of my mind the possibility that Sondheim might yet ask me to work with him on his next musical, but the thought that he only wanted me for my technological toys could not be entirely dismissed.

Some time before ten o’clock the fax machine rang. I put down the book. It was Atlas Shrugged by Ayn Rand, I remember quite distinctly, which was hypnotically dreadful. I stared at the fax machine as it answered the call. Its shrill cry was cut off. The caller had hung up. I imagined a garden in New England and a group of capering Sondheim friends.

‘How odd! It made a kind of awful chirruping sound.’

‘Oh! Oh! Oh! I know what that is. It’s a fax machine!’

‘A what-all?’

‘You know. For sending documents? Stephen’s got one in his den, I’m sure I’ve seen it there. Let’s go to it. My, such larks!’

I counted off the minutes as the gang made their way (in my imagination at least) to Stephen’s den, whose mantelpiece was crowded with Tony Awards. On the very piano on which he had composed ‘Send in the Clowns’ I saw in my mind’s eye signed photographs in silver-gilt frames of Lenny Bernstein, Ethel Merman, Oscar Hammerstein and Noël Coward.

Just as I was wondering if I might have misjudged the scenario, my fax machine screeched into life again. This time a handshake was made across the ocean and a fax chugged out. I ripped it off and there on the curling thermal paper was scrawled ‘Hi! Do you have something for us?’

I duly fitted into the machine the fax Sondheim had sent me earlier, dialled the number and pressed ‘Transmit’.

A cheerful ‘Thanks!’ was returned a few minutes later.

I had no idea how many teams there might be playing and realized that, for all his neurotic calling to ensure my vigilant presence for the evening, Stephen had not told me whether or not this would be a one-time deal.

I woke up at three with Atlas Shrugged on my lap and the fax machine free of further intercourse.

A week later a case of Haut-Batailley claret arrived with a note of thanks from Stephen Sondheim.


The treasure hunt was a great success. Due in no small measure to your kind participation.

With thanks,

Stephen.


Not a hint of a call to collaboration. I still await his summons.

By the time Alan Coren became the Listener’s editor, fax machines had become a signature ubiquity of the age, and there was nothing strange about my delivering copy to him that way without visiting the offices in Marylebone High Street from one month to the next. My next struggle, some seven or eight years later, would be to get newspapers and broadcasting companies to sign up to log on to the internet and furnish themselves with email addresses, but that is a whole other story for a whole other book for a whole other readership.





Contortionist

Perhaps the most stylish and beguiling figure in the London magazine world in those days was the caricaturist, editor and boulevardier about town Mark Boxer. Under the pen name Marc he had illustrated the front covers of A Dance to the Music of Time, all twelve volumes of which I had lined up along a bookshelf, next to the Simon Raven Alms for Oblivion sequence (which I much preferred, and still do). In the sixties Boxer had supervised the launch and life of Britain’s first colour supplement magazine for The Sunday Times and now he edited the Tatler. One day in the mid to late eighties I got a letter from him, asking me to call his office.

‘Ah yes. Stephen Fry. How do you do? Let me take you out to lunch. Langan’s tomorrow?’

I had heard of Langan’s Brasserie but had never been. Founded by Peter Langan, Richard Shepherd and the actor Michael Caine, it had acquired a reputation as one of the most glamorous and eccentric restaurants in London. The glamour was provided by the art collection, the Patrick Procktor menu design and the daily presence of film stars, aristocrats and millionaires; the eccentricity came in the form of Peter Langan. This pioneering restaurateur, an alcoholic Irishman of uncertain temper, was notorious for insulting customers to whom he might take unpredictable dislikes, tearing up the bills of those who dared to complain, stubbing cigarettes out in their salads and ordering them to leave. A bottle of Krug in one hand and a cigar or cigarette in the other, he would lurch from table to table, beaming and barking, grinning and growling, hugging and shoving. The food was good but not great, the atmosphere magical, and the experience, when Peter was around, unforgettable. Don Boyd told me that his wife, Hilary, had once found a slug in her salad. As Peter lurched hiccupping past the table, Don had stopped him and pointed out the unwanted gastropod in his wife’s greenery.

Peter bowed forward from the waist to examine the plate.

‘Why thank you,’ he said, taking up the pulsing, living slug between thumb and forefinger. ‘Thank you very much indeed, my darling.’ He dropped it into his glass of Krug, drained it down and burped. ‘Like a nice juicy snail, only without the nuisance of a shell. Fucking delicious.’

I arrived early, as I always do for appointments, and was led upstairs. Mark arrived exactly on time.

‘Hope you don’t mind it up here,’ he said. ‘It’s quieter. In case Peter’s about. Do you know him?’

I confessed that I did not.

‘Keep it that way,’ said Mark.

Boxer was an attractive-looking man aged, I suppose, about fifty, but youthful in a twinkly, almost elfin way. He was married to the newsreader and co-founder of TV-AM, Anna Ford. Over the first two courses Mark was charming, funny and inconsequential, as if the reason for his invitation to lunch was entirely social. He kept me in raptures with stories of his time at Cambridge.

‘It was quite the thing then to present oneself as homosexual. I used to wear fantastically tight white trousers and tell the rugby players that they were the creamiest darlings in the world. It was actually very odd not to behave like that. Amongst my set at least. No one batted an eyelid if you came on as gay. And of course it made the girls simply throw themselves at you. Did you know that I am the only person aside from Shelley to be sent down from one of the universities for atheism?’

‘No! Really?’

‘Well, not quite. I was editor of Granta and I published a poem by somebody or other that the university authorities said was blasphemous. They demanded I, as editor, be sent down, but E. M. Forster and Noel Annan and others simply leapt to my defence, so they changed it to a rustication, which they meanly set for May Week so that I would miss the May Ball, but of course they overlooked the fact that balls go on way past midnight. So on the stroke of twelve I returned to King’s in my white tie and tails and was chaired around from marquee to marquee like a conquering hero. It was too marvellous.’

It was hard to believe that this man was the same age as my father. He had the gift, if gift it is, of making me feel more than usually bourgeois, ordinary and unexciting.

‘So, à nos moutons,’ he said as the cheese arrived. ‘Tatler. I know you have written for us once before. Wonderful piece, by the way. Is it really true?’

He was referring to a feature to which I had contributed earlier in the year and which we will come to later. I blushed fiercely as I always did when that article was mentioned.

‘Yes. Quite true.’

‘Heavens. Anyway. The magazine … Do you read it, by any chance?’

‘Sometimes … I mean, I don’t positively not read it, but I don’t think I’ve ever actually bought one. Except the month my piece came out, that is.’

‘That’s all right,’ he said. ‘Here’s next month’s number. The covers are wonderful these days. We have Michael Roberts as our art director. He’s too splendid for words.’

I took his proffered copy of the magazine and flipped through the pages.

‘It’s all fine,’ said Mark. ‘Nothing wrong. It’s just that there’s something … something missing.’

‘Well whatever it is,’ I said, ‘it isn’t advertisements.’

‘Ha! No, we’re doing very well, really. But I need someone to come in every month to … to smell the issue before it goes to print.’

‘To smell it?’

‘Mm … you know. To look at the sum total of articles and spreads and to think about how they can all come together. To work on the text of the cover and the spinelines …’

‘Spinelines?’

‘The copy written on the spine.’

‘Of course. Spinelines, yes.’

‘I need someone who isn’t in on the everyday production of the magazine to take that look. To smell it all and to …’

A thought struck me. ‘Do you mean,’ I said, ‘that you want someone to do the puns?’

He slapped the table. ‘I knew you’d understand!’

Since Tina Brown’s pioneering reign at the Tatler’s helm the magazine had become notorious, amongst other things, for its punning headlines, sub-headlines and – as I now knew them to be called – spinelines.

‘That’s settled, then. You’re Officer Commanding Puns.’ He drained his coffee with clear satisfaction. ‘Oh, another thing I thought of on the way here. We get sent all kinds of books. For the most part insufferably dull fly-fishing manuals and the memoirs of forgettable duchesses, but sometimes more interesting titles might come our way. We don’t have a book reviewer. Why don’t I get all the books we’re sent couriered over to you in a batch once a week and you can …’

‘Smell them?’

‘That’s it. Smell them and then write a column in which you can review them or simply comment on the kinds of books that are being published these days. A zeitgeisty, smelly sort of thing. How does that appeal?’

I said that a zeitgeisty, smelly sort of thing appealed greatly.

‘Fine. Why don’t you pop back to Hanover Square with me, and I’ll introduce you around?’

‘Will I have to come into the office a lot?’

‘Just from time to time to have a …’

‘A smell?’

‘To have a smell, exactly.’

The first issue for which I acted as Smellfinder General was June’s. ‘June Know Where You’re Going’ was the date pun. Michael Roberts’s cover of a model in a frock of the deepest crimson found itself accompanied by the headline RED DRESS THE BALANCE. An article on aristocratic Catholic families was subtitled: ‘The Smart Sect’. Time has thankfully erased from my memory the other hideous verbal contortions of which I was guilty, but I came up with more than a dozen for each edition with which I was involved.





Critics and Couriers

Books began to arrive by the box-load. Rather than review under my own name I gave myself a made-up byline:


Williver Hendry, editor of A Most Peculiar Friendship: The Correspondence of Lord Alfred Douglas and Jack Dempsey and author of Towards the Brightening Dawn and Notes From a Purple Distance: An Ischian Memoir, casts a loving eye over some June publications …


Only it wasn’t so loving an eye at all. Hiding in cowardly fashion under this nom de guerre I was beastly unkind to someone called Baron de Massy, a nephew of Prince Rainier who had written an autobiography crammed with arse-paralysingly snobbish Monegasque drivel about Ferraris, polo-players and coke-snorting tennis champions. ‘Here is that marriage of style and content we look for in great writing,’ I, or rather Williver, wrote. ‘A shatteringly vulgar and worthless life captured in shatteringly vulgar and worthless prose.’

My career as a book reviewer was short-lived, but long enough to make me feel that it was not the occupation for me. For good or ill (perhaps it is what footballers call a fifty-fifty ball) I cannot bear to upset people. Perhaps it would be truer to say that I cannot bear to know that there are people going around whom I have upset and who think badly of me as a consequence. My overwhelming desire to please and to be liked has not gone unnoticed. I sometimes hopefully imagine that it may be an agreeable and acceptable enough quirk of character, but I have lived long enough to know that it is more likely to appal than appeal.

It is obvious that the purpose of critics is to transmit their opinion of the works that have been sent to them. In your life as a reviewer, the day will soon come when a book arrives which is too bad to respond to with anything other than the savaging you are convinced it deserves. You berate it and its author, you mock, you expose, you trash and you pillory. It is, for a short time, a wonderful feeling to tick an author off and in scalding prose to ridicule their inadequacies and rubbish their pretensions. After all, for weeks and weeks you have been compelled to read novels, autobiographies, histories, guides and collections, most of which are – dread word, as Wallace Arnold would say – fine. They are of sufficient quality to justify their publication and for the most part it will be easy enough, if you are a placating weasel like me, to find something about them to like. But, willy nilly, the iron has entered your soul. You cannot help but begin to look on authors and publishers as the enemy. They pound at your door at all times of the day and night clamouring for your attention. So many of them, all with so much to say. Their tics, minor flaws and mannerisms become an aggravation, but you hold your fire as reasonably as you can. One day, with all this building up inside you, there is a buzzing at the entryphone, and a motorcycle courier stands outside in the rain with a package for you to sign for. Another set of new literary works to be read and rated. After the leather-clad messenger of the metropolis has gone through the usual ‘Do you mind if I use your toilet?’ and ‘Oh, can I use your phone to call my dispatcher?’ and ‘Shall we have sex right here and now?’ I am left alone with his delivery. And this time one of the books is It. The Stinker.

Incidentally, anybody who thinks that a book reviewer has at least the profitable perk of hundreds of free books a month to offset his misery may not know about uncorrected bound proofs: these are flimsy and hastily assembled pre-release editions sent out to reviewers and to anyone likely to provide a winning phrase to be printed on the front of the proper later-to-be-printed dust-jacketed edition – ‘ “Deliciously insightful, coolly ironic,” Wayne Rooney’; ‘ “A rip-snorting, barn-storming, cliff-hanging, roller-coaster of a ride,” Iris Murdoch’; ‘“The dog’s bollocks: Bukowski is gang-raped by Burroughs and Gibson and has a bastard child,” Ann Widdecombe’ – that kind of thing. There is now an online auction market for the bound proofs of better-known authors, but in the mid-eighties they were so much waste paper to be thrown away as soon as they had been read and reviewed. Today email, .pdf and the eBook and iPad are beginning to put an end to the age of the bound proof, as they have to the age of the motorcycle courier, of course. In the eighties every phone call between editors and journalists, agents and clients, producers and writers, lawyers and lawyers included phrases like: ‘I’ll get it biked over to you,’ ‘Bike it over, I’ll sign and bike it back,’ ‘Is it small enough for a bike, or shall we cab it round?’ London in the mid-eighties buzzed and snarled to the sound of 550cc Hondas and Kawasaki 750s swooping and skidding around you, clipping your wing-mirrors, revving at the traffic lights and terrifying the citizenry with their desperado devilry.

I shall divert for a revealing story that a friend told me round about this time. Her aunt had been checked into Moorfields Eye Hospital, where she was due for a corneal graft, cataract operation or similarly routine, but nonetheless delicate, ophthalmic procedure. She was lying in bed wondering what was up, when the consultant came in.

‘Ah, Miss Tredway, how do you do? You’ve had the operation explained? What we do is we cut out your nasty cloudy old lens and replace it with a shiny new donor one. Simple as can be. Trouble is, we don’t have any donor eyes in at the moment.’

‘Oh.’

‘I shouldn’t worry, though.’ He went to the window and looked out over the City Road. ‘It’s raining, so it won’t be very long.’

You know there is something amiss when a doctor can absolutely guarantee that if the roads are slippery a fatal accident will be sure to befall a despatch rider somewhere in the city and that a fresh, healthy pair of young eyes will soon be speeding their way to the operating theatre packed in a cool-box. A cool-box bungeed to the pillion of a motorcycle in all probability …

Well, that was London in the pre-fax, pre-internet eighties. Couriers and cars did the work, and it was matter in the form of massy atoms, rather than content in the form of massless electrons, that had to be conveyed from place to place.

But I was telling you about The Stinker. It was inevitable that sooner or later in my career as a literary critic I would open a courier’s package (ooer, now but shush) and find a book about which there could be nothing good to say.

‘Well, if you haven’t anything nice to say, then don’t say anything,’ is the recommendation of most mothers, and as always their advice is worth considering. The difficulty comes when, as mentioned, iron has entered the soul and charity, compassion and fellow-feeling have fled it.

I shall refrain from naming names and titles, but The Stinker was the one that propelled me into meanness. I sharpened the nib, dipped it in the most caustic solution available and set forth to make my feelings known. Just as when a beautiful person is beautiful in all their lineaments – hair, nose, ankles, eyelashes and nape – so when a writer is bad they seem to strike one as bad in every particular, from style and syntax to moral outlook and spiritual worth. There will be those reading this book who have come to that same conclusion about me, although it is probable that they will have cast it down in disgust before getting this far. Unless they are reading it for review, of course, in which case I shall have cause to shudder. Or rather my mother will, since I do not read reviews.

I might have hoped that the nameless author of the nameless book that I so mercilessly tore into never read my review either, but I happen to know that they did. Oh, I was witty, devastating and – to anyone who read the piece – incontestably convincing and incontrovertibly correct. I adduced quotations with which to condemn the poor author out of his or her own mouth, I questioned their sanity, sense and intellect. I ‘proved’ that their book was not only bad but wicked, not only imperfect but opportunistic, creepy and deluded. All of which I sincerely believed it to be. It really was a most awful piece of work, this book. Had it been cack-handed and incompetent but well-intentioned and unobjectionable in disposition, I am sure I would have let it be. Since it was The Stinker, however, no feature redeemed it, and I let myself go. I mustn’t overstate things. You should understand that plenty of worse reviews were written of that book and of other books that week, plenty of meaner and more disapproving pieces are written about books every week. Nonetheless, my article would certainly cause anyone who read it to wince and to feel for the author. Why am I lingering on this book and my review of it?

In a long life of offering up works for public scrutiny I have had my own share of negative critical notices. I no longer look, and my friends know better than to commiserate with (or occasionally to congratulate) me on a review that I will never read. But in all the years during which I could not resist checking my reviews and on reading them felt myself punched and lowered and dispirited by the savageries or cruel perspicacities levelled at me, I never felt a tenth as chronically dreadful as I did in the weeks following the publication of my assault on The Stinker. I lay awake at night picturing his or her reaction. On the cowardly level I imagined that one day, when I least expected it, I would be waylaid by this now wholly deranged and indigent ex-author and have a quart of actual vitriol flung at my face as revenge for the quart of virtual vitriol I had flung in theirs. In less egoistic moods, I pictured their misery and humiliation and I felt like the worst kind of bully. What right had I to make them unhappy? What business of mine was it to hold up to the light their infelicities of phrasing or falsities of reasoning? Where the fuck, in other words, did I get off?

Any number of reviewers and critics will tell you that if someone chooses to present a work for money then the public should be warned before making an expenditure that they cannot recall. If you writers and performers don’t like the heat, they say, you can get out of the kitchen. What right, they will add, turning the question around, do practitioners of theatre, literature, film, television or any other art have to be immune from informed opinion? Are they only to be lauded and applauded, pampered, praised and petted?

I cannot deny a single word of these and many other of the cogent plaidoyers routinely offered by criticism’s apologists. There are all kinds of responses and attitudes that can justify the art and practice of reviewing, but none of them, not a one, addresses the question of how you live with yourself if your wicked wit, shrewd insight and scornful judgement will have hurt someone, will have them crying themselves to sleep. Or worse still, how you can live with yourself if you realize that you have become the kind of person who does not even care that they regularly cause pain, suffering, discouragement and loss of self-regard in those trying to earn a living in their field?

It is weak, it is wussy, it is probably a betrayal of everything the Cambridge literary ethos from Leavis to Kermode stands for, but I am much less interested in artistic standards, literary values, aesthetic authenticity and critical candour than I am in the feelings of others. Or in my own feelings, I suppose I should say, for I cannot bear to feel that I have offended or that I have enemies. It is weak, it is wussy, but there you are. And for that reason I was relieved when Alan Coren took over the Listener and suggested that I move away from literary reviewing and contribute instead a weekly column on general topics that might appeal to me. From that day on I have only agreed to review a book, film or television programme if one proviso is understood and accepted by the editor commissioning me: the review will be favourable or, if the product is so dreadful that even I cannot find a good word to say about it, there will be no article. I am less fastidious about kindness to the digital devices, smartphones and computer peripherals I sometimes review, but then their origins are usually so much more corporate and so much less personal. However, if it ever got back to me that the designers of a camera or the authors of a new piece of software were weeping because of something cruel I had said, then I would probably pack in my geek reviews too.

Most of all I refuse to say anything bad about the work of a friend. My literary integrity can go hang, but friendship is sacred. Of course, by telling you this, it allows you – were you so minded – to look back at the blurbs and jacket quotes I have given for writers I have known and speculate that when I wrote, ‘Brilliant, harrowing, lung-achingly funny’ I might really have been thinking, ‘Grisly, horrible, arse-seepingly incompetent’. You will never know.

One of Alan Coren’s favourite academic stories was one of mine too. It concerns a don, often identified as Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, that great moustachioed Edwardian doyen of letters, author of children’s adventure stories and responsible as ‘Q’ for the great edition of the Oxford Book of English Verse. Apparently he was welcoming a new Fellow to the Senior Combination Room at Jesus, the Cambridge College where he roosted for the last thirty years of his life.

‘We’re delighted to have you here,’ he said, putting an arm round the young man’s shoulder, ‘but a word of advice. Don’t try to be clever. We’re all clever here. Only try to be kind, a little kind.’

Like most university stories, this one is variously attributed and it probably never even happened but, as the Italians say, se non è vero, è ben trovato – even if it isn’t true, it’s well founded.

I wrote a weekly Listener column for another year. The Tatler smelling duties lasted only a few months before Boxer and I parted by mutual consent: the puns were threatening my sanity. I continued meanwhile to tap away at the keyboard for other publications as often as I was asked to. I seemed to be in almost limitless demand and, so long as I didn’t have to breach my peculiar rules on reviewing, all was well.





Confirmed Celibate

How did it all begin? Why did editors fasten upon me in the first place? What motivated Mark Boxer to be in touch? Why did Russell Twisk make an approach? Well, it is possible that I owed my journalistic career, such as it was, to a man called Jonathan Meades. If you watch good television you will know who I mean. He wears charcoal suits and sunglasses and talks about architecture, food and culture high and low as brilliantly as any man alive. For many years he was The Times’s restaurant critic, and there are many who might think that, pace Giles Coren and his generation, he has never been surpassed in that field. In the mid-eighties he had some kind of position on the Tatler, ‘features editor’ is I think the proper description. He got hold of my telephone number somehow, perhaps from Don Boyd, who knew everybody.

‘Forgive me for calling out of the blue,’ he said. ‘My name is Jonathan Meades and I work for the Tatler magazine. I got your number perhaps from Don Boyd, who knows everybody.’

‘Hello. How can I help?’

‘I am putting together an article in which people write about something they don’t do. Gavin Stamp, for example, is telling us why he doesn’t drive, and Brian Sewell is giving us a piece about never going on holiday. I wondered if you might be able to weigh in?’

‘Gosh! Er …’

‘So. Is there anything you don’t do?’

‘Hm,’ I scrabbled frantically around in the recesses of my mind. ‘I’m afraid I can’t really think of anything. Well I don’t strangle kittens or rape nuns, but I’m assuming this is about things we …’

‘… about things we don’t do which most of humanity does, exactly. Nothing?’

‘Oh!’ A thought suddenly struck me. ‘I don’t do sex. Would that count, do you think?’

A pause followed that made me wonder if the line had gone dead.

‘Hello? … Jonathan?’

‘Four hundred words by Friday afternoon. Can’t offer more than two hundred pounds. Deal?’

I cannot entirely understand, to this day, why I withheld my body from sexual congress with another for as long as I did. Kim and I had been partners in a complete and proper sense at Cambridge and for a month or so afterwards. Since then I had become less and less interested in sex while Kim had pursued a more conventional and fulfilled erotic career and had by now found himself a new partner, a handsome Greek-American called Steve. Kim and I still adored each other and still shared the Chelsea flat. He had Steve and I had … I had my work.

If I have a theory to explain the celibacy that began in 1982 and was not to end until 1996 it is that during that period work took the place of everything else in my life. Whatever effect multiple school expulsions, social and academic failures and the final degradation of imprisonment may have had on me, I think it true that my last-gasp escape into Cambridge and the discovery that there was work I could do and be valued for doing galvanized me into an orgy of concentrated labour from which I could not and would not be diverted, not even by the prospect of sexual or romantic fulfilment. Perhaps career, concentration, commitment and creation had become my new drugs of choice.

Work can be an addiction like any other. Love of it can be a home-wrecker, an obsession that bores, upsets, insults and worries those close to you. We all know that drugs, alcohol and tobacco are Bad, but work, we are brought up to believe, is Good. As a result the world is full of families who are angry at being abandoned and breadwinners who are even more angry because their hours of labour are not sufficiently appreciated. ‘I do it for you!’ they cry. While it may be true that work puts meat on the table, everyone around them knows that hard workers do it for themselves. Most children of workaholics would rather see less money and more of their parent.

Within a year of leaving Cambridge, friends and family were already referring to my apparent inability to use the word ‘no’. I soon began to hear myself described as a workaholic. Kim preferred the word ‘ergomaniac’ partly because he was a classical scholar and partly I suspect because the ‘maniac’ part better expressed the absurd frenzy with which I was starting to throw myself into every offer that came my way. To this day I am often reminded by those about me that I don’t have to say yes to everything and that there are such things as holidays. I don’t believe them, of course, no matter how many times they assure me it is true.

The question that most troublingly refuses to go away is whether my productivity, ubiquity and well … career harlotry … have stopped me from realizing what, in the world of fathers, teachers and grown-ups in general, might be called My Full Potential. Hugh and Emma, to name the two most obvious of my contemporaries, have never been as recklessly carefree, prodigal and improvident with their talents as I have. I want to say that they have always had reason to believe in their talents more than I have in mine. But then I also want to say that I have had more fun than they have and that:


For when the One Great Scorer comes

To write against your name,

He marks – not that you won or lost,

But how you played the Game.


Which is all very well, but while I may want to say all kinds of things, I am not sure that they would necessarily be true. I will not go so far as to claim that, when falling asleep every night, I mourn lost opportunities. ‘Every night’ would be an exaggeration. There is a vision that comes to me often though.

I picture myself at the surface of an ocean: the course of my life is played out as a descent to the sea bed. As I drop down I clutch at and try to reach blurred but alluring images representing the vocation of writer, actor, comedian, film director, politician or academic, but they all writhe and ripple flirtatiously out of reach, or rather it would be truer to say that I am afraid to leap forward and hug one of them to me. By being afraid to commit to one I commit to none and arrive at the bottom empty and unfulfilled. This is a self-aggrandizing, pitiful and absurd fantasy of regret, I know, but it is a frequent one. I close whatever book I have been reading in bed, and that same film plays out again and again in my mind before I sleep. I know that I have a reputation for cleverness and articulacy, but I also know that people must wonder why I haven’t quite done better with my life and talents. A jack of so many trades and manifestly a master of none. In my perkier moods I am entirely pleased with this outcome, for I refuse to stand on a carpet in a headmaster’s study and endure wise shakings of the head and heavy school-report pronouncements about my shortcomings. Such attitudes are grotesque, impudent and irrelevant. ‘Could do better’ is a meaningless conclusion. ‘Could be happier’ is the only one that counts. I have had five times the opportunities and experiences accorded to most, and if the result is a disappointment to posterity, well prosperity can eat it. In less perky moods, of course, I entirely concur with the judgements of the head-shakers and school-report pronouncers. What a waste. What a fatuous, selfish, air-headed, indolent and insulting waste my life has been.

While it is not exactly counterintuitive it may perhaps be less than immediately obvious to point out that it is a great deal more conceited of me to bemoan my life as a waste than for me to be more or less satisfied at the way it has turned out. Any regret at my lack of achievement suggests that I really believe that I had in me the ability, should I have concentrated on any one thing, to have written a great novel or to have been a great actor, director, playwright, poet or statesman or whatever else I might delude myself I had the potential for. Whether or not I have the ability to be any of those things, I do know that I lack the ambition, concentration, focus and above all will without which such talents are as useless as an engine without fuel. Which is not to say that I am lazy or unambitious in the short term. You might say I am good at tactics but hopeless at strategy, happy to slog away at whatever is in front of me but unable to take a long view, plan ahead or imagine the future. A good golfer, they say, has to picture his swing before he addresses the ball in order to drive. My whole life has been an adventure in hit and hope.

But sex. Yes, we have to return, I fear, to sex. We were discussing that commission for the Tatler. I wrote the article for Jonathan Meades, outlining my distaste for being cursed by nature with an urgent instinct to rummage about in the ‘damp, dark, foul-smelling and revoltingly tufted areas of the human body that constitute the main dishes in the banquet of love’ and my sense that the whole business was humiliating, disgusting and irksome. I suggested that a life without sex and without the presence of a partner offered numerous benefits. The celibate life allowed productivity, independence and ease free from the pressures of placating and accommodating the will and desires of another: released from the degrading imperatives of erotic congress, a new and better kind of life could be lived. Sex was an overrated bore. ‘Besides,’ I confessed as I ended the article, ‘I’m scared that I may not be very good at it.’

The piece was quoted and reproduced in whole or in part in several newspapers, and for the next twelve years it was rare for this particular C-word not to be attached to me much as macrobiotic is attached to Gwyneth Paltrow and tantric to Sting. I joined Cliff Richard and Morrissey as one of celibacy’s peculiar poster children. Profilers, chat show hosts and interviewers in the years to come would regularly ask if I was still keeping it up, ho-ho, whether I would recommend sexual abstinence as a way of life and how I coped with the loneliness of the single state. I had created a rod for my own back with this article but have never regretted writing it. It was, more or less, inasmuch as these things ever are, true. I did find the business of eros a nuisance and an embarrassment. I did enjoy the independence and freedom afforded me by being unattached and I was afraid that I might not be very good at sex. Am I going to deny my terror of rejection, or my low sense of my own physical worth?

With the passing of each year the odds against me ever forging a full relationship lengthened as I felt myself less and less practised in the arts of love and less and less confident about how I would ever go about finding a partner, even supposing that I wanted one. There was just so much to do. I was rehearsing in London prior to going down to Chichester to start Forty Years On, I was working on Me and My Girl, chugging out journalism and taking enthusiastic steps in another medium: radio.



The Tatler celibacy article. Photo Tim Platt/Tatler ©Condé Naste Publications Ltd. Words Stephen Fry/Tatler ©Condé Naste Publications Ltd.





Characters and the Corporation

Ever since I can remember I have loved radio, especially the kind of talk radio that only the BBC Home Service, later Radio 4, provides. Throughout my insomniac youth I listened through the day right up to the national anthem, when I would retune to the BBC World Service. ‘England made me,’ Anthony Farrant says to himself in the Graham Greene novel of that title. England made me too, but it was an England broadcast on 1500 metres Long Wave.

I wrote this as the opening of an article on the World Service for Arena magazine.


BBC World Service. The News, read by Roger Collinge … The warm brown tones trickle out of Bush House like honey from a jar: rich and resonant on the Long and Medium Waves for domestic listeners or bright and sibilant on the Short Wave for a hundred million Anglophone citizens of the world for whose benefit the precious signal is bounced off the atmosphere from relay station to relay station, through ionospheric storms and the rude jostling traffic of a hundred thousand intrusive foreign transmissions, to arrive fresh and crackling on the veranda table. Oh, to be in England, now that England’s gone. This World Service, this little Bakelite gateway into the world of Sidney Box, Charters and Caldicott, Mazawattee tea, Kennedy’s Latin Primer and dark, glistening streets. An England that never was, conjured into the air by nothing more than accents, March tunes and a meiotic, self-deprecating style that in its dishonesty is brassier and brasher than Disneyland. A Mary Poppins service, glamorous in its drab severity, merry in its stern routine and inexhaustible resource: a twinkling authoritarian that fulfils our deepest fantasy by simply staying, even though the wind changed long ago. Ooh, I love it …


I’m sure I knew what I meant at the time by the World Service’s ‘dishonesty’, but the truth is I still adored and valued radio above television. Radio 4’s mix of comedy, news, documentary, drama, magazine, panel game and quirky discussion is unique and was central to the fashioning of my outlook and manner. I grew up to the sound of warmly assured and calmly authoritative BBC voices vibrating the fabric speaker covers of valve wireless sets manufactured by Bush, Ferguson, Roberts and Pye. One of my first-ever memories is sitting under my mother’s chair in our house in Chesham while she tapped away on her typewriter with characters from The Archers arguing about dairy cattle in the background. My Music, My Word!, A Word in Edgeways, Stop the Week, Start the Week, Any Answers, Any Questions, Twenty Questions, Many a Slip, Does the Team Think?, Brain of Britain, From Our Own Correspondent, The Petticoat Line, File on Four, Down Your Way, The World at One, Today, PM, You and Yours, Woman’s Hour, Letter from America, Jack de Manio Precisely, The Men from the Ministry, Gardener’s Question Time, The Burkiss Way, The Jason Explanation, Round Britain Quiz, Just a Minute, I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue, Desert Island Discs and a hundred other dramas, comedies, quizzes and features have amused, amazed, enriched, enraged, informed and inflamed me from the earliest age. My voice, I think, owes more to the BBC microphone and the dusty, slow-to-warm-up Mullard valve than to the accents and tones of my family, friends and school fellows. Just as there are the lazily sucked bones of Wodehouse, Wilde and Waugh in my writing style, if style is the right word for it, so the intonations of John Ebden, Robert Robinson, Franklin ‘Jingle’ Engelmann, Richard ‘Stinker’ Murdoch, Derek Guyler, Margaret Howard, David Jacobs, Kenneth Robinson, Richard Baker, Anthony Quinton, John Julius Norwich, Alistair Cooke, David Jason, Brian Johnston, John Timpson, Jack de Manio, Steve Race, Frank Muir, Dennis Norden, Nicholas Parsons, Kenneth Williams, Derek Nimmo, Peter Jones, Nelson Gabriel, Derek Cooper, Clive Jacobs, Martin Muncaster and Brian Perkins have penetrated my brain and being to the extent that – much as heavy-metal pollutants get into the hair and skin and nails and tissue – they have become a physical as well as an emotional and intellectual part of me. We are all the sum of countless influences. I like to believe that Shakespeare, Keats, Dickens, Austen, Joyce, Eliot, Auden and the great and noble grandees of literature have had their effect on me, but the truth is they were distant uncles and aunts, good for a fiver at Christmas and a book token on birthdays, while Radio 4 and the BBC World Service were my mother and father, a daily presence and constant example.

I believed from the earliest age that I would be quite content to work in radio all my life. If I could just be a continuity announcer or regular broadcaster of some kind, how happy I would be. My dislike of my facial features and physical form contributed to this ambition. I had, as the tired old joke goes, a good face for radio. Announcers and broadcasters have no need of make-up or costume. For one who believed that any attempt at prettification on my part would only draw attention to my cursed deficiencies, a life in front of the microphone seemed like the perfect career. How much more realistic for me a national radio station than irrational venustation.

My first visits to Broadcasting House, the home of BBC Radio in Portland Place, had been as early as 1982, when I played a fictional news reporter for a Radio 1 programme called, I think, B15. The basement studios in Broadcasting House were all Bx, and I honestly cannot remember the value of the x which gave this programme its name. In its short run B14 or B12 or whatever it may have called itself was presented by David ‘Kid’ Jensen, an amiable Canadian disc jockey best known, according to a friend of mine who is very keen on this kind of thing, for being the least objectionable presenter of Top of the Pops in all its long history. My character on Bwhatever, Bevis Marchant, had his own little slot called Beatnews, a rather obvious parody of Radio 1’s ludicrously urgent, trivial and self-important Newsbeat. Within two weeks of me contributing to this programme Margaret Thatcher had dispatched a task force to recapture the Falkland Islands, and a week later I was taken off the air. My parody of Brian Hanrahan and others was deemed insensitive. I shouted over an electric egg beater in a bucket to recreate the sound of reporting live from a helicopter. I was in fact mocking the grandiose, faux-butch reporting style, not making light of the danger that the military were in, but that has always been too complicated a distinction for stupid people to understand. There was a war on, I was trying to be funny, therefore I had contempt for the sacrifice and bravery of the troops. My levity was tantamount to treason and must be stopped. I think I am angrier about that now than I ever was at the time. Pomposity and indignation grow in old age, like nostril hairs and earlobes.

Not long after Beatnews a BBC producer called Ian Gardhouse was in touch with me about contributing to a Radio 4 programme of his called Late Night Sherrin. Ned Sherrin was a well-known broadcaster who had started life as a television producer, first at Val Parnell’s ATV and then at the BBC. His most famous achievement in that phase of his life had been That Was The Week That Was, usually referred to as TW3, the live comedy show that had launched the satire boom and David Frost. Since then Nedwin, as I liked to call him, had given the world Up Pompeii!, Side by Side by Sondheim and a slew of collaborations with Caryl Brahms and others. Trained as a lawyer, he was known for his love of Tin Pan Alley, rich gossip and comely young men. He received his education at Exeter College, Oxford, where he read law, but before that he had been a boy at the most excellently named educational establishment in the history of the world – Sexey’s School in Somerset.

I took to Ned straight away. He was like a stern aunt who twinkled and giggled after a little too much gin. The idea behind Late Night Sherrin was to have a hero or heroine guest of the week who would be twitted and teased by Ned and an assortment of young witty types of which I was to be one. Ned called us his ‘young turks’. Late Night Sherrin morphed, for reasons neither I nor Ian Gardhouse can remember, into And So to Ned. They were both live, late-night shows. The routine was for us all to meet for supper high up in the St George’s Hotel just by Broadcasting House. The motive behind this, according to Ian, was so that he and Ned could keep an eye on the guests of the week and make sure they stayed relatively sober, a stratagem that failed riotously in the cases of Daniel Farson and Zsa Zsa Gabor.

After And So to Ned’s short life came Extra Dry Sherrin, whose format I cannot remember as being any different from the others: possibly it had live music or no live music or three guests instead of two. Extra Dry Sherrin lasted one series before Ian welcomed me into a new Sherrin-free, live 100-minute programme called The Colour Supplement – as the name suggests this was a Sunday ‘magazine’ show comprising a variety of features, one of which would be a section I could create and shape for myself in any way I chose. Each week I performed a kind of monologue as a different character: an estate agent, an architect, a journalist – I cannot remember the whole gallery. Their surnames usually came from Norfolk villages, so I do recall a Simon Mulbarton, a Sandy Crimplesham and a Gerald Clenchwarton.


It was unfortunate that the pay packets offered proved that the rest of the world held radio in no real esteem. I had grown up hearing Kenneth Williams and others bemoaning in quavering comic tones the insultingly nugatory fees they had been offered for their services and I soon found out that, compared to her brash younger brother, Television, Dame Wireless did indeed live the most frugal and threadbare existence. This never worried me: I would have done it for free, but it was sometimes hard to persuade Richard Armitage that hours composing broadcast monologues, taking parts in comedies and dramas and guesting on panel games were not a waste of time or beneath – as he seemed to think – my dignity. Radio is the poor relation of television insofar as monetary considerations go, but a rich one where it matters – in terms of depth and intimacy.

The writer Tony Sarchet and producer Paul Mayhew-Archer asked me to play an earnest investigative reporter called David Lander in Delve Special, a new comedy series they were creating. It was essentially a parody of Checkpoint, the very popular Radio 4 programme which featured doughty New Zealander Roger Cook inquiring into a different con, scam or swindle each week. The first part of the programme would catalogue the miseries of the unfortunates who had been exploited and ripped off: they might have had their house destroyed by expensive but incompetent pebble-dashing, been duped into buying a non-existent time-share villa, invested their savings in a – there were any number of ways that innocent lambs could be fleeced by rascally villains, the door-stepping confrontations with whom formed the second and most compulsively enjoyable part of the programme. Cook was famous for getting chi-iked, insulted, jostled, roughed up and even seriously assaulted by the angry subjects of his exposés. Delve Special barely had to exaggerate the stories that Checkpoint and its successor, John Waite’s Face the Facts, already provided. Over the next three years we made four series and then, when Roger Cook jumped to television, we jumped with him, being screened for a run of six programmes on Channel 4 as This Is David Lander, for which I wore a quite monstrous blond wig. When my workload was simply too heavy to allow me to do a second series, Tony Slattery stepped in, and the show was retitled This Is David Harper.



David Lander, earnest investigative reporter in a badly behaved blond wig.

One of the pleasures of making Delve for radio, aside from not having to wear a wig or care how I looked at all, was working with the guest performers who came along to play the victims and perpetrators. Brenda Blethyn, Harry Enfield, Dawn French, Andrew Sachs, Felicity Montagu, Jack Klaff, Janine Duvitski and many others came into the studio and gave of their brilliant best. Actually, ‘into the studio’ is not quite accurate. In order to achieve aural verisimilitude Paul Mayhew-Archer would often place us in the street, on the roof of Broadcasting House, in broom cupboards, catering areas, offices, corridors and hallways so that he and his engineer could capture the authentic tone and atmosphere of the scene. Location radio drama is not common, and the ‘Sir, sir! It’s a lovely day, can we have our lessons outside?’ sort of mood that it engendered made the recordings about as larky as such sessions can ever be.

Meanwhile, still with radio, The Colour Supplement soon folded. Ian invited me to participate in yet another piece of Sherrinry, this time a live Saturday-morning show called Loose Ends, or ‘Loose Neds’ as the regular contributors preferred to call it. Over the years these included Victoria Mather, Carol Thatcher, Emma Freud, Graham Norton, Arthur Smith, Brian Sewell, Robert Elms and Victor Lewis-Smith. The format was always the same. Around the table, whose top was laid with green baize cloth, sat the regular contributors and a couple of guest authors, actors or musicians who had some new release to plug. Ned would open with a monologue in which the week’s news was jokily reviewed. He was always very good at crediting the monologue’s author; in the early years this was usually Neil Shand or Alistair Beaton, his collaborator on a pair of satirical Gilbert and Sullivan adaptations, The Ratepayer’s Iolanthe and The Metropolitan Mikado, romping satires on the Ken Livingstone–Margaret Thatcher face-off which played to great applause in the mid-eighties. After the monologue, Ned introduced some feature which would have been pre-recorded by a regular contributor.

‘Carol, I believe you went off to investigate this phenomenon?’

‘Well, Ned …’ Carol would say and give a little preamble to her recorded passage.

‘Emma, you braved the dawn on Beachy Head to get a first-hand view, is that right?’

‘Well, Ned …’

I christened Emma, Carol and Victoria the WellNeds, and they stayed with the programme for as long as anyone.

For my first few contributions to Loose Ends I presented a range of characters much as I had on The Colour Supplement. One week there was a news story about an academic who had been made to watch hours and hours of television in order to compile a report on whether or not the programming was injurious to the British public, especially its youth. There was much talk in those days about the evils of scenes of violence in cop shows and their deleterious influence on the impressionable minds of the young. For reasons which now seem difficult to reconstruct imaginatively, Starsky and Hutch of all programmes was singled out as a major culprit, a symbol of all that was wrong. ‘The Nice Mr Gardhouse’, as Ned called Ian, suggested that I do a piece as an academic forced to watch television, so I tapped away that Friday afternoon and came in the next day with a piece written in the persona of a Professor Donald Trefusis, extraordinary Fellow of St Matthew’s College, Cambridge, philologist and holder of the Regius Chair of Comparative Linguistics. Trefusis, it turned out, was indeed horrified at the violence of British television. The violence done to his sensibilities and the sensibilities of a young and vulnerable generation by Noel Edmonds and Terry Wogan and others made him shudder and shake. Thank goodness, he concluded, for the jolly car-chases and fight scenes where actors dressed as policemen pretend to shoot each other – without innocent merriment of that kind television would be insupportably damaging to the young.

Heavy steamroller irony, I suppose, but issuing from the querulous mouth of a gabbling tweedy don too old to care whom he might offend, it seemed to work well, well enough at any rate to encourage me to keep the character and try something similar the following week. Soon Trefusis became my sole weekly contributor. A paragraph of introduction would suggest the fiction that I, Stephen Fry, had gone round to his rooms at St Matthew’s to interview him. The Professor started to get a trickle of fan mail. One piece, in which he savagely tore into the fad for Parent Power in education, turned the trickle into a flood of hundreds of letters, most of them asking for a transcript of the talk, or ‘wireless essay’ as he preferred to call them. Trefusis’s age and perceived wisdom and authority allowed me to be ruder and more savagely satirical than I could ever have been in my own vocal persona. The British are like that, especially the middle-class Radio 4 audience: a young snappy, angry person annoys them, and they shout at the radio for him to show some respect and get the spiritual and intellectual equivalent of a haircut. But let the same sentiments exactly, word for word, be uttered in high academic tones, as if by a compound of G. E. Moore, Bertrand Russell and Anthony Quinton, and they will roll on to their tummies and purr.

For the next four or five years I fed Loose Ends on an almost exclusive diet of Trefusis. Just occasionally I might appear in the guise of another character. Ned’s favourite alternative to the Professor was Rosina, Lady Madding, a kind of crazed old Diana Cooper figure. Her voice was a compound of Edith Evans and my prep-school elocution teacher:


I hope you don’t mind sitting in here, at my age you get rather fond of draughts. I know you young people feel the cold terribly, but I’m afraid I rather like it. That’s right. Yes, it is nice, isn’t it? Though I wouldn’t really call it a cushion, Pekinese is a more common name for them. No, well never mind, he was very old – just throw him on the fire would you?





Colonel and Mrs Chichester

In April 1984 I drove down to Sussex to start my summer of Forty Years On. I’ll run through the cast list.

Paul Eddington had been promoted to the part that he had watched John Geilgud play nearly sixteen years earlier, that of the headmaster. Eddington was, of course, a big star of television situation comedy, well known and loved as Penelope Keith’s harassed husband in The Good Life and more recently as Jim Hacker, the hopeless and hapless Minister for Administrative Affairs in the immensely popular Yes, Minister. He had been very friendly during the rehearsals in London, but I couldn’t help being slightly in awe of him. I had never worked in daily proximity with someone quite so famous before.

John Fortune took the role of Franklin that Paul had played in the original production. John was one of the greats of Cambridge comedy with John Bird, Eleanor Bron and Timothy Birdsall back in the late fifties. He had created with Eleanor Bron the legendary (and wiped) series Where Was Spring? His partnership with John Bird was to achieve great prominence again in the late nineties and beyond with their wildly intelligent and prescient satirical contributions to Bremner, Bird and Fortune.

Annette Crosby played the school matron. She is now best known as Victor Meldrew’s wife in One Foot in the Grave, but I remembered her as a fiercely glamorous Queen Victoria in Edward VII and an almost impossibly perky and delicious Fairy Godmother in the The Slipper and the Rose. Doris Hare appeared as the old grandmother. She was seventy-nine and a magisterial trouper of the old school, much loved for her years of playing Reg Varney’s mother in On the Buses. A fine young actor called Stephen Rashbrook took the part of the head prefect, while the rest of the school were played by local West Sussex boys.



From Forty Years On, Chichester, 1984. Self, Doris Hare, Paul Eddington and John Fortune.

The Chichester Festival, begun in the sixties by Leslie Evershed-Martin and Laurence Olivier, presented each year a long summer of plays and musicals in a large, purpose-built, thrust-stage theatre. The 1984 season offered The Merchant of Venice, The Way of the World and Oh, Kay! as well as the Forty Years On that I had come down for. A tent, since replaced by a fully fledged second house called the Minerva, served as a space for smaller experimental productions. As a gig, as a booking, Chichester was much prized by old-school actors who liked the relaxed atmosphere of a prosperous south-coast town, a long season in repertory that didn’t make too many demands and the security of guaranteed festival attendance. This regular local audience was known collectively as Colonel and Mrs Chichester on account of their severe and hidebound tastes – Rattigan seemed to be the only post-war playwright they were able to stomach. Colonel and Mrs Chichester were not afraid to impart the exciting news that they went to the theatre to be entertained.

Patrick Garland was a delightful director, courteous, intelligent, benign and delicately tactful. In rehearsal, he had an endearing habit of addressing the perplexed boys in the cast as if they were members of an Oxbridge common room. ‘Forgive my mentioning it, gentlemen, but I do feel myself constrained to observe that the dilatory nature of the communal egress immediately consequent upon Paul’s second act exordium is injurious to the pace and dynamism of the scene. I should be so grateful if this deficiency were remedied. With grateful thanks.’

The play’s designer was Peter Rice, whose son Matthew soon became a lifelong friend. When not assisting his father he dug the garden of the little house he had hired for the season, shot rabbits and pigeons, skinned and plucked same and cooked them into exquisite suppers. He played the piano, sang songs, sketched and painted. His voice was not unlike Princess Margaret’s: high, grand and piercing. Perhaps he had spent too much time in her presence, being a close friend of her son, David Linley, with whom he had been at Bedales.

Unlike Matthew, whose cottage was a charming rural retreat in the Earl of Bessborough’s estate, I had taken a rather dull modern flat a short walk from the Festival Theatre. I devoted my spare time to the script of Me and My Girl. Once or twice Mike Ockrent came down to work on it with me. Robert Lindsay had been duly cast as Bill, and the part of Sally was to be taken by Leslie Ash, subject to her taking lessons in tap and singing. The major character role of Sir John had been given to Frank Thornton, better known as the Grace Brothers floorwalker Captain Peacock in Are You Being Served? The show’s opening was all set for autumn in Leicester if I could just deliver a final rehearsal script within the next month.

My parents came down to Chichester from Norfolk for Forty Years On’s first night. I proudly introduced them to Alan Bennett and Paul Eddington. Alan in turn introduced us to his friends Alan Bates and Russell Harty.

‘I love a play where there are laughs and sobs,’ said Alan Bates, in a much camper voice than I would have imagined could ever issue from the lips of The Go-Between’s Ted Burgess and Far From the Madding Crowd’s Gabriel Oak, two of the manliest men in all of British film. ‘I mean, you’ve got to have a giggle and a gulp, haven’t you, or what’s the theatre for?’

Russell Harty, with anagrammatic diablerie, referred to Alan Bates as Anal Beast, or, in mixed company, Lana Beast.



First-night party for the Forty Years On ‘transfer’, Queen’s Theatre, London, 1984. Katie Kelly (back to us, shiny bun), boys from the cast, self, Hugh Laurie, sister Jo.

I think I was disappointing as Tempest. In my mind I believed that I could play the part and play it with brilliance, but something held me back from being any better than competent. I was OK. Perfectly good. Fine. That last is the worst word in theatre. When friends come backstage and use the word ‘fine’ about a play, a production or your performance you know they hated it. Often they preface it, out of nowhere, with the word ‘no’, which is fantastically revealing.

‘No, it was fine!’

‘No, really, I thought it was … you know …’

Why would they open a sentence with ‘No’ when they have not even been asked a question? There can be only one explanation. As they walk along the backstage corridors towards your dressing-room they have said inside their own head, ‘God, that stank. Stephen was embarrassingly awful. The whole thing was ghastly.’ Then they enter and, as if answering and contradicting themselves, they instantly say, ‘No, I thought it was great … no, really, I … mmm … I liked it.’ I know this is right because I so often catch myself doing exactly the same thing without meaning to. ‘No … really, it was fine.’

The production as a whole was considered a success, however. Colonel and Mrs Chichester enthused, and word soon got out that we were going to ‘transfer’.

‘Excellent news,’ Paul Eddington said to me one evening as we stood waiting to go on. I nearly wrote ‘as we stood in the wings’, but Chichester had an apron stage that thrust out into the auditorium on three sides, so we must have been standing behind the set.

‘Ooh!’ I said. ‘What good news?’

‘It’s official. We are going to transfer.’

‘Wow!’ I did a little dance. I had no idea what he was talking out.

It took me two days to work out the meaning of ‘transfer’. The boys in the cast seemed to know, the women who served in the cafeteria knew, the tobacconist on the corner and the landlady of my flat knew, everyone knew except me.

‘Wonderful news about the transfer,’ said Doris Hare. ‘The Queen’s, I believe.’

‘Er …?’ Did a transfer mean a royal visit? Now I was even more puzzled.

‘I’ve played most of the houses on the Avenue, but this will be the first time I’ve played the Queen’s.’

The Avenue? I pictured us in some tree-lined boulevard giving an outdoor performance to a bored and affronted monarch. The idea seemed grotesque.

Later, Patrick said to me, ‘You will have heard the good news about the transfer?’

‘Indeed. Yup. Great, isn’t it?’

‘This will be your West End debut, I think?’

So that is what it meant! The production would be transferred from Chichester to the West End. A transfer. Of course. D’uh.

I finished the Chichester season in a frenzy. Mike Ockrent came to collect my final draft of Me and My Girl a week before we closed.

Back in London I decided, since Kim and Steve were so happy together at Draycott Place, that it was time for me to move out of Chelsea and set up on my own. For a hundred pounds a week I found myself the tenant of a furnished one-bedroom flat in Regent Square, Bloomsbury. Just me and the new love of my life.





Computer 2

Early in the year I had called Hugh up excitedly. ‘I’ve just bought a Macintosh. Cost me a thousand pounds.’

‘What?’

Hugh enjoyed about a week of relaying the news of my fantastic expenditure on something as absurd and unworthy of outlay as a raincoat before he discovered that this Macintosh was a new type of computer.

I was more insanely in love with this strangely beautiful piece of technology than anything I had ever owned before. It had a cable leading out of it that ended in a device called a ‘mouse’. The screen was white when you started it all up and loaded the system disk. The text that came up was black on white, like paper, instead of the fuzzily glowing green or orange on black offered by all other computers. An arrow on the screen could be activated by moving the mouse on the desk next to the computer. Images of a floppy disk and a dustbin appeared on screen and all along the top were words which, when clicked on with the mouse, pulled down a kind of graphical roller-blind on which menu options were written. You could double-click on pictures of documents and folders and windowpanes would open. I had never seen or imagined anything like it. Nor had anyone. Only Apple’s short-lived Lisa computer had used this way of doing things before and it had never had a place in the consumer or home market.

While it was being developed this graphical user interface had been referred to as WIMP, standing for Windows, Icons, Menus, Pointing-device. I was instantly a slave to its elegance, ease, usefulness and wit. Most of you reading this will be too young to imagine a time when computers could have been presented in any other fashion, but this was new and revolutionary. Extraordinarily, it didn’t catch on for ages. For years and years after the January 1984 release of the Apple Macintosh the rivals – IBM, Microsoft, Apricot, DEC, Amstrad and others – all dismissed the mouse, the icon and the graphical desktop as ‘gimmicky’, ‘childish’ and ‘a passing fad’. Well, I shall refrain from going too deeply into the subject. I am fully aware of how minority a sport my love of all this dorky wizardry is. All you need know is that I, my 128 kilobyte Macintosh, Imagewriter bitmap printer and small collection of floppy disks were all very, very happy together. What possible need could I have for sex or human relationships when I had this?

Hugh, Katie and Nick Symons shared a house in Leighton Grove, Kentish Town; I had my Bloomsbury flat; Kim stayed on in Chelsea. We all saw each other as much as possible, but I was about to be busy performing eight times a week on the West End stage.

Richard Armitage had arranged with Patrick and the Forty Years On producers that in November I would be released from the run of the play for a few days, so that I could travel up to Leicester for the opening of Me and My Girl: this contractual clause was insisted upon not because Richard kindly believed I should have the treat of attending the first night of a musical to which I had contributed a script, but because he wanted to be sure that I would be on hand should the dress rehearsal and opening demonstrate a need for urgent, unforeseen rewrites.

We had participated in some strange conversations over the preceding months in which Richard had proved himself capable of changing hats mid-sentence, shuttling between his identity as the show’s producer, the heir and manager of the composer’s estate and, not least so far as I was concerned, my agent. ‘I have had a word with myself,’ he would say, ‘and I have agreed to my outrageous demands as to your financial participation in this project. I wanted to cut you out of any backend, but I absolutely insisted, so much to my annoyance you have points in the show, which pleases me greatly.’

Early on in the rehearsal process Leslie Ash had not responded well to her dance and vocal lessons and by mutual agreement she had dropped out of the cast. I sat in Richard’s office one afternoon as he rubbed his chin anxiously. Who on earth could we cast as Sally?

‘What about Emma?’ I said. ‘She sings wonderfully and, while she may not have done any tap dancing, she’s surely the kind of person who can do anything she turns her mind to.’

Richard’s personality once more split before my eyes. ‘Of course. Brilliant. I want her,’ he said, before riposting, ‘Well, if you do, you’ll damned well have to pay through the nose for her. Oh now, come on, be reasonable. She has no experience, no real name. That’s as maybe, she is one of the greatest talents of her generation and, as such, she’ll cost you.’

I left Richard to wrestle the matter. I understood that he fell short of actually beating himself up and managed before too long to end his tense negotiations by shaking his hand on a deal satisfactory to both of him.

Emma duly joined the cast. She knew Robert Lindsay well, having worked at the Royal Exchange in Manchester, where Robert had presented his excellently received Hamlet. In fact I believe I am right in saying that Emma and Robert had known each other very well back then. Really jolly well indeed. Oh yes.



Me and My Girl. Emma’s dressing-room on the first night.


Forty Years On had to undergo one or two cast changes for its West End run. John Fortune and Annette Crosbie were unavailable for the transfer, and their roles went to David Horovitch and Emma’s mother, Phyllida Law. The boys were recast too: the local Chichester lads who had thrown themselves into their roles with such aplomb and good spirits were now replaced by London stage-school professionals, who were just as sparky and cheerful and a great deal more streetwise and experienced.

The day before the opening, during the interval between the technical run and the evening dress rehearsal, I walked out of the Queen’s Theatre stage door with David Horovitch and a group of these boys, heading for a pasta restaurant that they with their Soho savvy had recommended. Alan Bennett was out in the street, attaching bicycle clips to his trousers.

‘Are you going to join us for spaghetti?’ I asked him.

‘Yes, do!’ said the boys.

‘Oh no,’ said Alan, in slightly shocked tones, as if we were inviting him to a naked orgy in an opium den. ‘I shall cycle home and have a poached egg.’ Alan Bennett is always excellent at being as much like Alan Bennett as you could reasonably hope. A keen mind, a powerful artistic sensibility, a fierce political and social conscience – but a man of bicycle clips and poached eggs. Is it any wonder that he is so loved?

My name was now up in neon on Shaftesbury Avenue. I was too embarrassed to take a picture, which now, of course, I regret. I do have a photograph of the first-night party. I should imagine I was very happy. I had every reason to be.

Paul Eddington was happy too, enjoying a ripe and fruity time in his career. He had just been elected to the Garrick Club, which gave him enormous pleasure, and he and Nigel Hawthorne had been paid a large sum of money for a TV commercial, which pleased him almost as much.

‘A very large sum,’ he said happily. ‘It’s to advertise a new Cadbury’s chocolate bar called Wispa. Nigel whispers in my ear in his Sir Humphrey character – half a day’s work for the most extraordinary fee.’

‘Gosh,’ I said, ‘and do Tony Jay and Jonathan Lynn get a good wedge too?’

‘Ah!’ Paul winced slightly at my mention of the names of the writers and creators of Yes, Minister, a mention I had not made mischievously but out of genuine curiosity as to how these things worked. ‘Yes. Nigel and I had a twinge of guilt about that, so we’re sending them each a case of claret. Jolly good claret.’

There is a chasm between writers and performers: for each, life often looks better across the divide, and while I am sure Tony and Jonathan were pleased to receive their case of jolly good claret, I cannot doubt that they may have preferred the kind of remuneration Paul and Nigel were enjoying. As I was to discover, however, writing has its rewards too.

One night, as the curtain came down, Paul whispered in my ear with delighted triumph, ‘I can tell you now. It’s official. I’m Prime Minister.’

That night the final episode of Yes, Minister had been broadcast. It ended with Jim Hacker succeeding to the leadership of his party and the country. Keeping the secret, Paul told me, had been the hardest job he had ever had.

I settled into the run of the play. There were six evening performances a week with matinees on Wednesdays and Saturdays. I would be saying the same lines to the same people, wearing the same clothes and handling the same props eight times a week for the next six months. Next door in the Globe Theatre (now called the Gielgud) a show set in a girls’ school called Daisy Pulls it Off was running, and the cast of schoolgirls and schoolboys in each got on very well together, as you might imagine. Each Wednesday afternoon in the interval between matinee and evening performance there would be a backstage school feast, the boys hosting in the Queen’s one week, the girls in the Globe the next. Further along the street stood the Lyric Theatre, where Leonard Rossiter was playing Truscott in a revival of Joe Orton’s Loot. One evening we were stunned to hear that he had collapsed and died of a heart attack just before going on. Only a few months earlier both Tommy Cooper and Eric Morecambe had also died on stage. A small selfish and shameful part of me regretted the certainty that I would now never meet or work with those three geniuses at least as much as I mourned their passing or felt for the desolation such sudden deaths must have brought their families.


November came, and it was time for me to go up to Leicester for the opening of Me and My Girl. The plan was to arrive on Thursday for the dress rehearsal, stay on Friday for the first night and be back in London in time for the Saturday matinee and evening shows of Forty Years On. Who meanwhile would be taking my place as Tempest? I was horrified to discover that it would be Alan Bennett himself, reprising his original performance from 1968. Horrified, because I would, naturally, miss the chance to see him.

He came into the dressing-room I shared with David Horovitch on the Monday evening of that week.

‘Oh, Stephen, I’ve got a funny request. I don’t know if you’ll want to accede, but I’ll put it to you anyway.’

‘Yes?’

‘I know you aren’t going till Thursday, but would you mind if I went on as Tempest on the Wednesday matinee and evening as well?’

‘Oh goodness, not at all. Not at all.’ The dear fellow was obviously a little nervous and wanted to dip his toes in the water and feel his way back into the role with a smaller matinee audience. The wonderful part of it all was that I could now be in that audience and watch him. For two performances. It is not often that an actor gets to see a production he is in, and while many prefer not to watch someone else playing their own part, especially if it is a master like Bennett, I was too much the fan to care if the comparison cast me in the shade. Which I knew it would. After all, he wrote Tempest for himself and he was Alan, for heaven’s sake, Bennett.

I watched him both times and went round to the dressing-room.

‘Oh, Alan, you were astounding. Astounding.’

‘Ooh, do you think so, really?’

‘I’m so pleased you were on today, but you know,’ I said, ‘you absolutely didn’t need to ease yourself in with a matinee performance, you were perfect from the start.’

‘Oh, that isn’t why I asked if I could go on today.’

‘It isn’t?’

‘To be honest, no.’

‘Well, then why?’

‘Well, you know I’ve got this film?’

Indeed I did know. Alan had written the screenplay for a film called A Private Function, which starred Maggie Smith, Michael Palin and Denholm Elliott. I was planning to catch it over the weekend.

‘You see,’ he said, ‘it’s the Royal Command premiere this evening, and I wanted a solid excuse not to have to go …’

It is a very Bennetty kind of shyness that sees per-forming on stage in front of hundreds of strangers as less stressful than attending a party.


Leicester passed in a blur. The dress rehearsal of Me and My Girl seemed fine, but without an audience it was impossible to tell whether any of the slapstick and big comic routines would really work. Robert and Emma were wonderful together. Robert’s comedy business with his cloak, with his bowler hat, with cigarettes, cushions and any other props that came his way was masterly. I hadn’t seen physical comedy this good outside silent pictures.



Me and My Girl. Robert Lindsay and Emma Thompson.

I went round the dressing-rooms with good-luck bottles of champagne, cards, bunches of roses and expressions of faith, hope and gratitude.

‘Well, we are waiting for the final director now …’ said Frank Thornton, adding in his most lugubrious manner the answer to my unspoken question, ‘… the audience!’

‘Ah!’ I nodded at this wise actorly thought.

In the end the final director jerked up their thumbs with a loud ‘Lambeth Walk’ ‘Oi!’. They stood and cheered at the end for what seemed like half an hour. It was a most wonderful triumph, and everybody hugged each other and sobbed with joy just as they do in the best Hollywood backstage musicals. Mike Ockrent’s magical and comically detailed direction, Gillian Gregory’s choreography, Mike Walker’s arrangements and a chorus and cast that threw themselves body and soul into every second of the two hours’ running time ensured as happy an evening as I can remember in the theatre.

I would not want to be misunderstood. Musicals are still not quite my thing, and I am sure there are plenty of you who will wince at the thought of pearly kings and queens and larky high kicks accompanying a 1930s rum-ti-tum-ti score. Nonetheless I was pleased to be involved with something so alien to my usual tastes and which bubbled and bounced with such unaffected lightness of touch and warm silliness and unapologetic high spirits. We bucked the trend for self-regarding, high-toned, through-sung operatic melodramas. Not just bucked, buck-and-winged. I liked the fact that we were presenting an evening that paid homage to the origins of the word ‘musical’ as an adjective not a noun. From its beginnings the genre was Musical Comedy, and we had all hoped that there was still a demand for that kind of theatre. At the party I leant forward to a beaming Richard Armitage.

‘Do you think,’ I yelled in his ear, flaunting my theatrical jargon, ‘that we will transfer?’

‘Sure of it,’ said Richard. ‘Thank you, m’dear. My father is looking down and winking.’

I turned away, a tear in my eye. I knew how important it is for men to feel that they have finally earned the approval of their fathers.





Conspicuous Consumption





Country Cottages, Cheques, Credit Cards and Classic Cars

Back in London, the run of Forty Years On continued through Christmas and the New Year. I had started to cross off the days on a chart in the dressing-room like a prisoner scratching on the wall of his cell. There is something quite dreadful about what enforced repetition of action and speech does to the brain. Experienced stage actors all know how common it is to suffer a kind of out-of-body experience on stage where you look down and helplessly watch yourself from above. The moment comes to speak your lines and you will either freeze and dry up or say the same speech three or four times in a row without noticing. Only a pinch or a kick from a fellow actor can save you.

There was one scene in Forty Years On in which I had to tick a boy off for something or other. I would strike the corner of a desk hard with my index finger in time to the rhythms of my reprimand. One half-empty matinee I looked down and saw that the varnish on the desk had been worn away by the striking of my finger. For some reason this upset me greatly, and I resolved that evening to strike another part of the desk. When the moment came I raised my hand, aimed a good six inches to the left of the scuff mark and brought my finger down with a bang on exactly the usual place. For the next few days I tried again and again, but some form of extreme and insane muscle-memory insisted that my finger had always to hit the same spot. This disturbed me deeply, and I began to look upon the two or three weeks remaining as a hideous incarceration from which I would never escape. I didn’t share this sense of suffocating torment with David, Phyllida or Paul, as they seemed, with their greater experience, serene and at ease.

Doris Hare, who was eighty by this time, had more energy than the rest of us put together. She was the only principal in the cast who didn’t go straight home as soon as the show ended. She and I would go most nights to Joe Allen’s. Doris had a way of entering the restaurant that made one convinced that it was not a woollen shawl about her neck, but a fox fur fastened with an emerald clasp, and that her companion was not a gawky and self-conscious young actor but a sleek compound of Noël Coward, Ivor Novello and Binkie Beaumont.

‘The secret, dear,’ she would tell me, ‘is to enjoy yourself. Why would we be in the theatre if we didn’t love every minute of it? Casting, rehearsals, matinees, touring … it’s all marvellous.’ And she meant it.

Joe Allen’s, an American diner-style restaurant, is a popular hangout for actors, dancers, agents, producers and playwrights. The famously rude waiters and waitresses are often drawn from the ranks of showbusiness themselves. An American producer is notorious for once having got impatient at the slow service. He clicked his fingers for a waiter, calling out, ‘Actor! Oh, Actor!’

I sat there in Joe Allen’s one evening with Russell Harty, Alan Bennett and Alan Bates. All eyes were upon our table until suddenly heads swung towards the door. Laurence Olivier and Dustin Hoffman walked in. Our table no longer existed.

‘Well, that’s us told,’ said Russell.

Olivier walked past, beaming at everyone in a general way.

‘Why don’t you go and say hello to him?’ Alan Bennett said to Russell. ‘You know him well.’

‘I couldn’t do that. Everyone would say, “Look there goes that odious Russell Harty sucking up to Larry Olivier.”’

Harty and Bennett were very good friends. They each had a house in North Yorkshire. Alan would drive them up in his car at weekends. On one such journey, so the story goes, Alan said, ‘Why don’t we play a game of some kind to beguile the hours?’

‘What about Botticelli?’ said Russell.

‘Ooh no! That’s too competitive.’

They thought for a while, then Alan piped up, ‘I know. We each have to think of the person whose underpants we would least like to have to wear on our head.’

‘Colin Welland,’ said Russell without a moment’s hesitation.

‘Ooh, that’s not fair,’ said Alan, ‘you’ve won already.’

On another occasion, as they were driving through Leeds, Russell wound down the window and called out to a morose-looking woman waiting for a bus in the pelting rain, ‘Hello, love! All right?’

As she looked up in bewilderment he wound the window back up, leant back and said with great satisfaction, ‘The privilege of being able to cast a golden ray of sunshine into an otherwise dull and unremarkable existence.’


As soon as I was free from the fetters of Forty Years On my life seemed to triple in speed and intensity. I moved out of the Bloomsbury flat and into a large furnished house in Southgate Road on the fringes of the de Beauvoir Estate between Islington and the Balls Pond Road. Nick Symons, Hugh, Katie and I shared this excellently eccentric house for the better part of a year. It looked, to Hugh’s approving eye, like the kind of house the Rolling Stones might have rented in 1968. It was crammed to every corner with Benares brass trays, alabaster lamps, buhl cabinets, stuffed birds and waxed flowers in glass domes, lacquer screens, papier-mâché bowls, mahogany chiffoniers, oil paintings of varying quality in chipped gilt plaster frames, indecipherable objects of sinister Dutch treen, impossible silvered wallpaper and madly tarnished mirrors. Our landlord, who dropped by only occasionally, was a spongey-nosed individual by the name of Stanley. He seemed very relaxed and unconcerned about a group of what were little more than students living their disordered lives amongst his antique bibelots and whatnots.

The second series of Alfresco had been aired nationally by this time, making not the slightest dent upon the public consciousness. I was busy enough with the Listener, radio, tweaks for Me and My Girl’s West End transfer and my first proper film role. Directed by Mike Newell, the picture was called The Good Father, adapted from a Peter Prince novel by Christopher Hampton.

At the read-through I glanced nervously around and tried to look as if I belonged at the table. There was Simon Callow, whose controversial new book Being An Actor had served as the first blast of the trumpet against the monstrous regiment of tyrannical stage directors; next to him sat one of my favourite actresses, Harriet Walter; next to her, Joanne Whalley, who was just about to make a name and earn enduring teenage-fantasy status for herself bringing Michael Gambon off in The Singing Detective; and next to her sat one half of the National Theatre of Brent, Jim Broadbent. And finally there was the film’s star, Anthony Hopkins, a man from whom charisma, power and virility radiated with a force that was frankly frightening. I had been faintly obsessed with him ever since his blue eyes burnt out of the screen at me in Richard Attenborough’s Young Winston.

Too late for the preliminary introductions, Miriam Margolyes had burst in like a beaming pinball just in time for the start of the read. When it was over she approached me.

‘How do you do? I’m Mir …’ She stopped and plucked at her tongue with her thumb and forefinger, ‘… Miriam Margolyes. Sorry about that, I was licking my girlfriend out last night and I’ve still got some cunt hairs in my mouth.’ Miriam is perhaps the kindest, most loyal and incorruptibly decent person on the whole Equity roll, but she is certainly not someone to take out to tea with the archdeacon.

In the film I played a man called Creighton, divorced and beaten down by the crushing weight of life, children and alimony. I had only one scene, but since it was with Hopkins himself it was in my mind as good a role as Michael Corleone and Rhett Butler combined. The plot required me to have been at school with Simon Callow, which wounded me a little, as I knew he was a good eight years older than me. To someone in their twenties, eight years is a lifetime. I knew that I was not the type ever to be asked to play lissom youths or handsome lovers, but it did seem a little hard to be plunged into middle age for my first-ever film role.

People are strange about casting.

We hold a party at Southgate Road about this time. I go around with a Nebuchadnezzar of champagne topping up the guests and trying not to breathe in the fumes myself being well aware of what my allergy to champagne might bring on. As I pass by, an actor friend asks what I am up to and I mention The Good Father.

‘What sort of role?’

‘Oh, I play this rather defeated father and husband who’s going through a divorce.’

‘You!’ the actor is unable or unwilling to hide the contempt, outrage and disapproval in his voice. ‘What the hell would you know about that?’

I grin tightly and move on. So I should be playing nothing but celibate gay men? Is that how acting works? I suppose the actor, who is married, with a second child on the way and not very much in demand, is peeved that he should be out of work while juicy parts are going to lucky buggers like me: his savage titter of disbelief must be his way of coping. People who didn’t go to drama school, have enormous holes in their Chekhov technique and are given parts that they cannot possibly play out of any true experience must be excessively aggravating to proper actors. I can see that, but I am still a little hurt.

We are rather excited tonight to have Kate Bush at the party. Hugh has just been in a video of her newest song. Two Nebuchadnezzars of champagne last the evening perfectly, and for those, like me, who don’t drink it, we are all still of an age where guests bring bottles and there is enough red wine to keep us merry too. Talking of red wine, parked in the street outside the house is my new pride and joy, a claret-coloured Daimler Sovereign. How perfect is my life. I want to weep when I look back. Enough money to keep me in cigarettes, shirts and a nice new car, but not so much as to isolate me from this charmed studenty existence of Bohemian house-sharing and irresponsible fun. Experiences are still new and exciting, my palate is not jaded, life is not stale.

We were happy and lucky, but this was Thatcher’s Britain, and we did not let a moment pass without giving Thatcher’s Britain a searing indictment. Forgive the phrase. We were still children really and Thatcher’s Britain seemed to us to be something that needed searingly to be indicted, the searinglier the better. You might imagine that it had treated us so well that we should be on our knees thanking it for the film roles, job opportunities, affordable property prices, Daimler Sovereigns and burgeoning prosperity that had come our way with a minimum of effort. We certainly did not see it that way. Firstly, our educations and upbringings had been received under Labour and Edward Heath’s more liberal and consensus-based dispensations. The new callousness and combative certainty of Thatcher and her cabinet of vulgar curiosities were alien to the values we grew up with, and it smelt all wrong. I know that if you are flourishing in a regime you are supposed not to bellyache about it. Seems ungrateful. Cake and eat it. Biting the hand that feeds. The moral high ground is easy to perch on if you’re in a cashmere sweater. Chattering classes. Trendy liberals. Bah. I do see that. Bad enough from someone in an ordinary job, but to hear searing indictments of Thatcher’s Britain from an actor …

The world finds it difficult to credit the breed with enough brains or the qualities of seriousness, understanding and worldly experience required for a political statement to which they can attach the slightest value. Daffy airheaded twazzocks, every one of them, is more or less the accepted view; one from which it is hard to dissent, and I speak as a fully paid-up member of Equity and the Screen Actors Guild myself. This is partly because, love them/us as I do – hard to find a kinder, funnier, more loyal bunch, etc., etc. – there are probably more embarrassing featherheads and ludicrous naifs in the acting profession than in any other. Perhaps because to penetrate a role properly you first have to empty the brain of all cynicism and self-awareness and such irrelevant impedimenta as logic, reason and empirical sense. Certainly some, but not all, of the very best actors I have known are innocent of any such encumbrances. I have noticed that, whenever I have made the mistake of getting myself embroiled in some public controversy or other, the side that holds the opposing view will always refer to me as an actor. It successfully devalues whatever it is I might have said. I have spent more time writing than acting, but ‘After all, he’s only a writer,’ doesn’t have quite the same sneering finality as ‘Why should we pay any attention to the views of an actor?’ I am not always such an imbecile as to be surprised by that, or even aggrieved. We all choose whatever weapons are at hand in a fight and when we get close in we jab and kick at the weakest and most vulnerable parts.

I mention all this because I am teeing up a section in which I have to take you through more sickening examples of my good fortune, dissipation, wanton wastefulness and sheer cheapness of spirit and lowness of social or moral tone.


Me and My Girl transferred to the Adelphi Theatre. Matthew Rice, David Linley and I made our way on foot from the stage door in Maiden Lane to the first-night party at Smith’s in Covent Garden. As we walked, paparazzi closed in on David like wasps at a picnic. ‘This way, Lord Linley.’ Flash. ‘Lord Linley, Lord Linley!’ Flash, pop, flash. Every now and then he would bat them away with a growl. They would shrink back, mass and swarm again. This continued for the length of our walk.

‘What can it be like?’ I asked David.

‘You’ll know soon enough,’ he said.

This was a charming remark, but not one I could set much store by. My name was beginning to mean a little more in the world, but there was still no danger of photographers shouting it out on the red carpet. As soon as I had understood that a few appearances on television, especially in a show like Alfresco which appealed to so few, would not generate instant fame, I had relaxed into life and work without troubling myself too much about the whole business. Letters had started to come in, a few from Alfresco … watchers, I won’t say fans, and some from Loose Ends listeners or readers of the magazines for which I wrote. Once or twice I would be stopped in the street.

‘You’re that … that man …’ Fingers would be clicked and feet stamped at the effort of memory.

‘I know I look like him, but I’m not,’ I tried saying once or twice. I soon learnt that whether or not they knew my name or where they had seen me they knew perfectly well that I was not anybody’s doppelgänger. For good or ill my features are unmistakable, and since that time I have accepted that pretending not to be me is no good. Some can get away with it, but not I. Sunglasses, pulled-down beanies and muffled-up scarves make no difference. I might as well be carrying a sign with my name on.

As 1985 wore on, and Me and My Girl clearly established itself as a major hit, royalty statements from Noel Gay Music began to arrive. The ‘backend’ that Richard Armitage the agent had strong-armed Richard Armitage the producer into accepting was beginning to bear fruit.

Martin Bergman said to me with his usual assured omniscience, ‘Oh yes, Stephen, you’ll get at least a million out of it, no question.’

I didn’t believe him for a second, but the weekly arrival of cheques was a delightful new feature of my life.

The first thing I did as soon as I fully understood that my ‘net worth’ was increasing was to sign up for every conceivable kind of plastic. When you applied for a Diner’s Club card you could ask to be sent two, one for personal use and one for business. I needed no such distinction to be made in my life, but two cards, hurrah! I had a gold American Express Card, at that time the ultimate status symbol, as well as an ordinary green one. I had the usual bank card, two Mastercards (Access, your flexible friend, being one) and two Visa cards. Added to these were sundry store, subscription and membership cards. Do you remember Clifton James as Sheriff J.W. Pepper in Live and Let Die and The Man With the Golden Gun? Big, pot-bellied American in a Hawaiian shirt forever chewing and dabbing his brow with a bandana? There’s a scene where he takes out his wallet, and its concertinaed compartments flip down almost to the ground exposing dozens of credit cards. That was my wallet.

Why? Well, I am distrustful of too much certainty in self-analysis, but I do not think this fatuous and infantile display of ‘worth’ can have been unconnected to the crime that got me arrested. Aged seventeen, I had run riot around England with someone else’s credit cards – a Diner’s Club and an Access card. That is what had got me sent to Pucklechurch prison.† I suppose eight years later I still found it hard to believe that I merited my own cards. I was now creditworthy. These cards were daily reminders that the long nightmare was over and that I was at last a proper, decent citizen solidly placed on the right side of the law. Not that this was to be anything like an endpoint for me. By no means. The same old self-destructive urges were only just below the surface. In all too short a time those same credit cards, symbols of legitimacy and respectability or not, would be chopping endless lines of far from legal and less than respectable cocaine.

For the meantime I clung to these tokens of worth, worthiness, credit and credibility. I spent £7,000 on a laser printer for my Macintosh computer. It was a staggering sum and in the eyes of most people unjustifiable and absurd. No one had ever seen before such extraordinary print clarity and quality from a computer. The standard machines were the dot-matrix kind, usually taking special paper that had punched holes down the sides; they produced type that was composed, as the name suggests, of dots, resulting in a fuzzy, low resolution. In the radio studio I was now able to brandish Trefusis scripts that looked as if they had been professionally typeset. With great solemnity I would tell the guests and contributors around the Loose Ends table that I wrote my script in longhand and then dropped it off at the printer’s who produced three copies, one for Ian Gardhouse, one for the sound engineer and one for me. I would be stared at as if I were tragically and perhaps dangerously insane, but the fact that they could swallow such a ludicrous story shows how rare laser-printed pages were back then.

I became the first non-businessperson I knew to have a carphone. I would sit in traffic, wallowing back against the Connollized leather of the Sovereign, and call people for the sheer pleasure of being able to say, ‘Hang on, the lights are turning green,’ and hearing my interlocutor turn green too, with envy. Of course, they probably just thought, ‘What a wanker,’ but I was too happy to care.

I decided that I should have a house in the country. Look, I can’t keep apologizing, but I will say one more time, I know how horrible this must be to read. A cat that keeps falling on its feet, even one that had a rather problematic kittenhood, does not make a very interesting or admirable hero. I have to lay out the facts as I recall them in the full knowledge that they reflect little or no credit on me. The cash was flying in, and I was a victim of nothing but my own saucer-eyed cupidity and trashy delight in the riches the world seemed so keen to offer me.

Having run away as a child from what I could now see was a blissful country home, I wanted to make one of my own. The country meant only one thing to me, Norfolk. There was one small problem, however. I knew that my parents, particularly my father, hated display and swagger and swank. I was too embarrassed to let them know quite how much I was earning. It seemed obscene and unjustified. My father I associated with a crippling work ethic and a contempt for money, or at least a complete lack of interest in it. For me to be running about the garden of life with my pinny spread open to catch all the gold coins raining down on me would have struck him, I believed, as grotesque and disgusting. This would be income almost as dishonestly come by in his eyes, or so I told myself, as the money I used to steal in my badolescence.

Stephen’s way with embarrassing problems has ever been either to run away or, as in this case, to lie his way out of trouble. You do not need to have lived many years on the planet to know that this means to lie your way into trouble. I decided to tell my parents that I wanted to buy a place in Norfolk which I would open as a restaurant. It seemed less sybaritic and self-indulgent than to buy one purely as a second home. My parents appeared to believe me, or at least were as usual kind enough to pretend to and not call the lie at once.

I am the world’s quickest and least patient shopper. I pluck from shelves like a Supermarket Sweep contestant on crystal meth. I never try clothes on for size. Queues and waiting drive me insane with impatience. It turned out that I was like this with houses too. I contacted a Norfolk estate agent and bought the third house I looked at. The first two were tempting but needed too much work. The one I settled on was a solid six-bedroom farmhouse, originally sixteenth-century but mostly overclad with Victorian brick in the rather yellowy grey characteristic of that part of Norfolk. I showed my parents round. Restaurant tables were imagined in the large dining-room and drawing room, and there was talk of the knocking-through of hatches, the construction of a bar and cold room and the hiring of a chef and waiting staff. Tactfully this was never really mentioned again. It was obvious that the house was for me to live in, and that if I ever did entertain the notion of being a restaurateur it was no more than a passing fantasy. Embarrassed by how inappropriate the house was for my age and single state, I told people that I had a ‘country cottage’ in Norfolk. Just a little place for weekends.

So there I was, a celibate man with a ludicrously big house and a ludicrously big car. A ludicrously big car? It was surely time to put that right. I embarked upon what was to turn into a six- or seven-year classic-car spending spree, starting with an early seventies Aston Martin V8. It was a garish Yeoman Red when I bought it, so I had it resprayed a sleek and understated Midnight Blue. I cannot remember which I loved more, my little house in the country, my Aston Martin, my Apple computer or my gold AmEx card. What a styleless arsehole I was, what a prodigal tit, what a flash fuckhead. I look back and see only waste, vanity, emptiness and puerile conceit. That I was happy offers me no compensation now.

In the replay of regret that flickers through my mind I picture how I might have used the money that poured in so prodigiously. Wasn’t I happy enough in London? Hugh, Katie, Nick and I loved Southgate Road and now we were ready to pool our resources and buy our own house together. Why did I need a large place in the country too? I loved my Daimler Sovereign, why should I need another car and another and another? A man can only drive one vehicle at a time, for heaven’s sake. I loved my Macintosh, so why did I need to replace it every time Apple came up with a new model? Why did I need any of the baubles I spunked my money on? What the hell was I playing at? I could have saved the money, invested it, husbanded it. I might just as well tell myself that I could have sung Don Giovanni at Covent Garden or opened the batting at Lord’s. As Dirty Harry tells Hal Holbrook in Magnum Force, ‘A man’s gotta know his limitations.’ I will never be provident, prudent or prescient. Never. I do not have it in my genes to be so. I believe that change, improvement, heuristic development and the acquisition and advancement of learning and wisdom through experience are all possible and desirable. I also believe that leopards will always be spotty, skunks smelly and Stephens idiotically wasteful and extravagant. Some things are not susceptible to change.

‘You’ll never have to work again,’ someone said to me at a party. To me this was like being congratulated on becoming tetraplegic – ‘Hurrah! You’ll never have to walk again! You can stay in bed all day.’ Perhaps that is why I spent money so freely, so that I always had the incentive to work.


Another incentive to work was the example of Ben Elton. The second series was the last the world ever saw of Alfresco, but between putting the finishing touches to the final sketch of the hundred or so he wrote for it and completing his co-authorship of the second series of The Young Ones he had somehow contrived to write all six episodes of an entirely new comedy drama of his own invention which he called Happy Families. It starred Jennifer Saunders in the five roles of an old grandmother and her four lost granddaughters. Ade Edmondson, shortly to become Jennifer’s real-life husband, played the hapless grandson who must search the world to reunite them all. I was cast as the same nonchalantly callous Dr de Quincy I had played in a few Alfresco sketches, with Hugh as Jim, my Kiplingesque friend and companion. The series was directed by The Young Ones producer-director, Paul Jackson. During the shoot, which took place in and around Denstone in Staffordshire, not five minutes from the charms of Uttoxeter and the horrors of Alton Towers, Paul mentioned that next year he would be putting together a new live comedy show for Channel 4. He wondered if Hugh and I would be interested in contributing to it. We conferred nervously with each other in the bar that evening. The new world of youthful stand-up comedy was going to be represented on this ‘edgy’ ‘alternative’ and ‘ground-breaking’ show. Stand-up was another string to Ben Elton’s bow: he appeared regularly compèring at the Comedy Store and he was certainly going to do a session or two in the new series. Other comedy teams would be appearing, such as Mark Arden and Steve Frost, who performed as the Oblivion Boys, and Rik Mayall and Ade Edmondson, who had come together again, this time as the Dangerous Brothers. Hugh and I wondered if we would stick out like sore and inappropriately tweedy thumbs. Despite our characteristic fears and forebodings we decided that we should do the show. In the end, somewhere at the bottom of our churning wells of nonsense Hugh and I knew that we could and should do comedy together. It was a kind of destiny.


Back in London after filming, Hugh, Katie, Nick Symons and I each bought a share in a large house in St Mark’s Rise, Dalston. Situated just off the Sandringham Road, which on account of its predominantly drug-dealing Yardie population was known as Da Front Line, the house was in need of some repair, and we set about improving it straight away. Which is to say we hired a team of perky young plasterers and decorators to do it for us. They were very good, and I should tell you about them.

Oh my God, Stephen is going to talk about the quality of work done by the team who came to decorate his house. WTF?

As they say on helplines, bear with me caller …

One of the plasterers, Martin, was really very, very expert indeed. Marvellous at ceiling roses and all kinds of moulded ornamental plasterwork. The other two, Paul and Charlie, were more than competent at the rendering, skimming, bonding, sanding, painting and other ancillary skills that might be expected from a general builder, but they had another quality. They were quite extraordinarily funny. I brought them coffee, as you do when you have the builders in, and I chatted with them in what I hoped was a friendly and unpatronizing manner but just couldn’t get over how much they made me laugh. They had been at the University of East Anglia in Norwich, which seat of higher education they had quickly vacated, dropping out and moving to London, working in the building trade and wondering if comedy might ever be an attainable goal. Charlie was the lead singer in a punk outfit which apparently had a cult following. Paul entertained our household with impressions of London types, the especial favourite being a Greek cockney who had an eccentric way with very cockneyfied English. This character was based on a real-life Hackney kebab-shop owner called Adam. Hugh and I believed that, excellent as Paul and Charlie were with the bonding, skimming, rendering and so forth, they really should have a stab at making their way in comedy. Paul wasn’t sure he would like performing but thought that perhaps, one day, he might see if he could make it as a writer.

The most successful comedy writer I knew lived just up the road in Islington. He was Douglas Adams. The success of the radio series, books and television adaptation of The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy had earned him international regard, reputation and riches. He was a gigantic man, at least three inches taller than me, although it seemed much more. When he ran up and down the stairs the whole house shook. He was curious about and amused by all kinds of inanimate articles and objects, by living plants and creatures, by himself, by other people, by the world and by the whole universe. The most fundamental laws, principles and accepted systems that underlie everything and are taken for granted by almost all of us were to him fascinating, funny and appealingly odd. More than anyone I have ever known he combined childlike simplicity with a great sophistication of understanding and intelligence.

Almost every day when I was not working I would go round to his house off Upper Street and, like a shy schoolboy, ask his wife, Jane, if he might be free to play. He was never free to play, of course, being eternally under the shadow of a writing deadline and so, naturally, we would play. Douglas’s remark about deadlines has become the final word on the subject. ‘I love deadlines, I love the whooshing sound they make as they fly by.’

In what manner did we play? What was the substance of our play? Scalextric? Trains? Jam sessions? Dressing up? No – I fear that you might already have guessed. Douglas was the only person I knew who, like me, owned a Macintosh computer. Like me, he upgraded to a new machine every time Apple brought one out. Like me, he more than just liked it, he loved it, believed in it, wanted to shout out its pioneering, world-changing importance from the rooftops. Like me, he could not believe how so many people could be chained to IBM-compatibles running CP/M or the new operating system, MS-DOS, both of which did nothing but put text up on the screen. We believed that the mouse, icons, drop-down menus and whole graphical-desktop idea had to be the way forward and were easily upset and enraged by those who failed to see it. Like all fanatics we must have been quite dreadfully boring, boorish and bothersome. Together we moved from the 512 ‘Big Mac’ to the Mac Plus with its magical SCSI connectors and thence to the all-colour Mac II and beyond. Douglas could well afford it, and I was beginning, as Me and My Girl money continued to roll in, to be able to match his spending pound for pound. Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, but to be monied was very heaven.

Any meaningful kind of internet was, of course, years off. Not only was there no World Wide Web, even servers, services and protocols like WAIS, Gopher, Veronica, Jughead, SuperJANET and Archie, today long moribund, were then a futurist’s dream. There had been Prestel, an early online service run by the Post Office which ran very happily on my old BBC Micro and allowed simple mail and messaging, and there was also Compuserve, a commercial online service that the ordinary enthusiast could log on to using a simple acoustic coupler modem. The exciting parts of the burgeoning internet, like electronic mail, Telnet and FTP, were tantalizingly out of reach, available only to those in academia and government. Most of Douglas’s and my time was spent downloading small programs (especially kinds called ‘inits’) and trying them out on our machines until they crashed. There was no real purpose behind it all. If Jane asked us why we needed to do what we did and what the point was, which as a keen-brained, hard-nosed realist of a barrister she did from time to time, we would look at each other in wonderment.

‘Point?’ Douglas would roll the word round in his mouth as if it was new to him.

I would quote King Lear’s ‘Reason not the need’.

For some people, computers, digital devices and machines of that nature will be functional objects whose purpose is to serve by performing specifically needed tasks. If there is a little tweaking required to ensure that such functions can better be fulfilled, then so be it: let there be a little tweaking. For other people, people like Douglas and me, the tweaking is the function. Using a computer to write a book, fill in tax returns or print out an invoice is something you could do, but how much less fun than messing around. People like Douglas and me bond with digital devices as owners bond with dogs. Unless you are blind, or a shepherd, policeman or security guard, dogs do not have a function, they are there to be loved, tickled and patted – to bring joy. I suppose the more common affliction of this kind is the one people have with cars. Rowan Atkinson, Steve Coogan and Robbie Coltrane, for example. They use their cars to go to the shops, drive home and so forth, of course they do, but that is not what dominates their attitude and relationship to them. If you have not been blessed or cursed with deeply emotional feelings for machines you will set me down as a dork and a geek, much as you might set them down as petrol-heads and boy racers. Enthusiasts are used to being mocked, maligned and misunderstood. We don’t really mind. In truth, there is every probability that Douglas and I relished being esoteric hobbyists who spoke a recondite language and devoted hours to fruitless projects. I am ashamed to confess that a little bit of regret entered the soul when Microsoft finally got the point and started to offer their own graphical interface. They called it Windows, and by 1992 version 3.1 had reached the stage where it was almost usable. Another three years were to pass before Windows 95 could finally be called an operating system, rather than an add-on to MS-DOS. That was eleven years after the introduction of the Mac, a lifetime in computer terms, and Douglas and I felt on the one hand vindicated and on the other a little deflated, as though the crowd had found their way into the secret garden. One of the most unattractive human traits, and so easy to fall into, is resentment at the sudden shared popularity of a previously private pleasure. Which of us hasn’t been annoyed when a band, writer, artist or television series that had been a minority interest of ours has suddenly achieved mainstream popularity? When it was at a cult level we moaned at the philistinism of a world that didn’t appreciate it, and now that they do appreciate it we’re all resentful and dog-in-the-manger about it. I am old enough to remember the cool long-haired boys at school who were seriously annoyed by the success of Dark Side of the Moon. They went around muttering ‘sell-out’ when a month before they had bored anyone they could find on the subject of the misunderstood brilliance of Pink Floyd and how the world was too stupid to recognize their genius.

Douglas and I had years of lonely pleasure ahead of us, however, and the two- or three-year period of our intense visiting, disk swapping and techie chatter counts as among the happiest of my life.

Douglas’s writing routine was painful in the extreme. Sue Freestone, his publisher at Heinemann, would come round and beg, often almost with tears welling in her eyes, for pages from his printer. Douglas would hurl himself downstairs to the coffee machine, hurl himself back up again, thump to his desk and sit in front of the computer. After an hour or so twiddling with the screensaver, the wallpaper, the title of the file, the placement on the desktop of the folder the file was stored in, the formatting, the font, the size, the colour, the margins and the stylesheets, he might type a sentence. He would look at it, change it to italics, swap the word order around, get up, stare at it some more. Hum, curse, growl and groan and then delete it. He would try another sentence. He would look at this one and now perhaps give a little puff of pleasure. He would stand up, stride across the room and hurl himself down to the kitchen, where Sue and I would be gossiping and smoking around the table, and make himself another incredibly strong coffee.

‘Dare I ask?’ Sue would say.

‘Going well. I have the first sentence!’

‘Oh.’ It would be perhaps July with the new novel already overdue the previous September. One sentence written so far. Sue would smile tightly. ‘Well, that’s a start at least …’

Douglas would nod enthusiastically and fling himself back up the stairs, coffee dripping in his wake. We would hear the feet thump across the floor above our heads and then an agonized cry of ‘No! Hopeless!’ would tell us that the proud first sentence was not, after all, up to snuff, and a banging on the keyboard would register its angry deletion. An author’s day is tough enough, but the writing life of Douglas Adams was excruciating in a manner quite unlike anyone else’s I have ever known.





Carlton Club Crustiness

Ben Elton, meanwhile, whose creative flow knew no constrictions of the smallest kind, could not be expected to be content with his thousand Alfresco sketches, two series of The Young Ones, the creation of a whole new comedy drama serial and the prospect of Paul Jackson’s Channel 4 show. On his return from Happy Families filming in Staffordshire he immediately started work as a co-author on a new BBC situation comedy. Actually, to call it new would be wrong; it was in truth a second series, but one which wholly reworked the original.

The Black Adder, starring Rowan Atkinson and written by him and his long-time collaborator and fellow Oxonian Richard Curtis, had been broadcast two or even three years earlier and, although crammed from end to end with simply superb performances and brilliant comic scenes, had been generally regarded as something of a disappointment. The BBC decided that, whatever else the show’s qualities might be, it was certainly too expensive to continue with: its producer John Lloyd was later to describe it as ‘the show that looked a million dollars and cost a million pounds’.

Rowan had already at this stage decided that, even if it did get picked up for a second series, he would no longer be a writer on it, which left his co-creator Richard Curtis to decide whether he wanted to go it alone or find a collaborator. He opted for the latter course, and the writer he chose was Ben Elton. Richard Armitage, who was Rowan Atkinson’s agent, believed that Blackadder certainly had potential enough to justify his pressuring the BBC to relent, but he entertained the gravest doubts about Ben Elton’s suitability for the project. He called me into his office.

‘Elton,’ he said. ‘Richard Curtis seems to want to work with him on the next Blackadder.’

‘That’s a brilliant idea!’

‘Really? What about all those farting jokes?’ Richard had still not forgiven Ben for Colonel Sodom and his exploding bottom in There’s Nothing to Worry About.

‘No, Ben is perfect for this, honestly.’

‘Hm …’ Richard sucked at his Villiger cigar and pondered deeply for a while.

Ben is sweet-natured, kind, honest and true. He is one of the most extraordinarily gifted people I have ever met. As much as he is gifted he seems cursed with a woeful talent for causing people to disapprove of him and to wrinkle their nose in distaste and scorn. They distrust what they see as his faux Cockney accent (it isn’t faux, he has always talked that way, as do his brother and sister), the earnest self-righteousness of his political views and the (perceived) unctuous manner in which he expresses them. Ben is all kinds of things but has never been a fool and knows this very well, yet the one accomplishment he seems not to have been granted is the ability to do anything about it. Richard Armitage was certainly one of those who found him hard to take, but he was too shrewd not to see that, if the decade could be said to have a comedy pulse, then no one had their finger on it more surely than this same Benjamin Charles Elton with his growly and unlovable accent and his predilection, to Richard’s mind, for bottom, penis and wind-expulsion humour.

‘You really think so?’ He looked at me with the blend of disbelief and disappointment you might expect to see on the face of the secretary of a Pall Mall gentlemen’s club on hearing a member recommend Pete Doherty for election to the wine committee.

I was flattered to have my opinion so valued. My contribution to the success of Me and My Girl, which had made Richard the happiest man in London, and the fact that I could be taken to any weekend gathering or dinner party without letting the side down, had led him to rely on me as a kind of intermediary between his world and the brave new one that was springing up around him.

‘Absolutely,’ I said. ‘There really is going to be another series is there?’

‘The question,’ said Richard, snatching blindly at the receiver hanging on the complicated switchboard behind his right shoulder, ‘is whether we can persuade the BBC to give it a second chance. They want to decimate the budget.’

‘That’s not too bad. Only ten per cent.’

‘Hey?’

‘To decimate means to take away one in ten …’

This kind of footling pedantry makes most people want to give me a good kicking, but Richard always enjoyed it. ‘Ha!’ he said and then, as a voice came on the line, ‘Get me John Howard Davies. By the way,’ he added to me as I stood up to leave, ‘we must talk about Me and My Girl on Broadway some time soon. Farewell.’

I was not, of course, privy to Richard Curtis, Rowan, Ben and John Lloyd’s discussions as they created the second Blackadder series, but I do know that the decision to reduce the scale of the show was, from Ben’s point of view, a comic necessity; the fact that from the BBC’s it was a financial one might be regarded as a rare and happy collision of interests. When the executives saw the scripts that Ben and Richard came up with they breathed a sigh of relief. The budget was more than decimated, it was at the very least quartered.

It is not my job to speak for Ben, but this is how I interpret his conviction that it was comically necessary to pare the show back. The Black Adder had been shot on a grand scale, with many filmed exteriors and imposing locations. There were extras everywhere, there were populous battle scenes and much riding on horses and clanking of armour. The footage for each episode was edited and then shown to an audience, whose laughter was recorded on to the track. The resultant programme was without atmosphere, but more importantly without focus. I have a theory about situation comedy that I trot out to anyone who is prepared to listen or, in your case, to read. I see sitcoms as like a tennis match, where the most important thing for the spectator is to be able to see the ball. It does not matter how athletic, supple, graceful, fast and skilful the players are – if you can’t see the ball all their athleticism is just so much meaningless gesture, inexplicable running and swiping and stroking; the moment you see the ball it all makes sense. The problem with The Black Adder, I thought, was that you never saw the ball. Wonderful and delightful were the mad shouting, conspiratorial whispering, machiavellian plotting, farcical hiding, dramatic galloping and wicked sword thrusting, but the ball of what was at stake from moment to moment, what the characters were thinking or saying or intending, was lost in the wealth of background: sentries at every gate, sweeping vistas, busy pages, squires and stewards busily paging, squiring and stewarding and, without meaning to, all taking the audience’s eye off the ball. Ben wanted the whole thing stripped down to the essentials and he felt it imperative that the shows should be performed in front of an audience and taped in the true multi-camera studio-based sitcom style that had given us Fawlty Towers, Dad’s Army (which he venerated) and all the great classics of television comedy.

I do not go so far as to claim that I was instrumental in the series going forward, but I do know that Richard Armitage’s influence over the BBC was enormous – aside from anything else his boyhood friend Bill Cotton, the Managing Director of Television and Kingmaker in General, was one of the most powerful men in the corporation. They were both children of 1930s music stars. Billy Cotton the bandleader and Noel Gay the tunesmith were best friends who ran Tin Pan Alley, and their sons were best friends who ran much in the succeeding world of popular entertainment. Rowan and Ben were my friends, and I could not have been more pleased that the idea of a historical comedy series using their unique talents would be given another chance. I thought no more about it, other than nursing to myself the happy thought that I might have been responsible for persuading Richard Armitage that Ben was a good choice.

It came as a great surprise therefore to be asked if I would consider playing a regular character in the series. The first I heard about it was during the course of what Ben liked to call a ‘crusty’.

For all his (utterly mistaken) reputation as a joyless, puritanical socialist Ben has always been, since I first knew him, inordinately fond of old-fashioned and very English style, manners and grandeur. He adores P. G. Wodehouse and Noël Coward and has a passion for English history. I share much of this. I love the world of clubland, old established five-star hotels, the streets of St James’s and mad traditional institutions from Lord’s cricket ground to the Beefsteak, from Wilton’s to Wartski’s, from Trumper’s of Jermyn Street to the Sandpit of the Savile Club.

Perhaps, as we were both from European Jewish families who escaped Nazi persecution, the ability to penetrate even occasionally and tangentially the fastnesses of the Establishment makes us feel more strongly anchored to the codes and culture we could so easily never have known. Perhaps, as with my insane collection of credit cards, being recognized by the hall porters and headwaiters of London’s smartest institutions helped convince me that I was not about to be arrested.

Since leaving university I had been a member of the Oxford and Cambridge Club in Pall Mall, a classic St James’s palace of smoking rooms, dimpled and winged leather armchairs and grand marble staircases. Fiery torches on the outside wall throw their flames upwards in the evenings, and in the courts below can be heard the thump and clack of racquet and billiard balls. You had to be a member of either of the universities to join, of course, but more surprisingly, given the seventy-year co-educational status of both establishments, it was a male-only club, with women grudgingly being allowed to visit in a special wing and drawing-room reserved for them. Perhaps the greatest privilege of membership for me was the availability of other clubs in London and around the world. Reciprocal arrangements came into force during August when the Oxford and Cambridge closed for staff holidays. During that time the Reform Club (forever associated in my mind with Phileas Fogg in Round the World in Eighty Days), the Traveller’s Club (home of the private oratory of the mysterious and sinister Monsignor Alfred Gilbey), the RAF Club, the Naval and Military (usually referred to as the ‘In and Out’), the absurdly named East India, Devonshire, Sports and Public Schools Club in St James’s Square and half a dozen others opened their doors to bereft Oxford and Cambridge members in need of clubly pampering. The Carlton Club, a High Tory edifice in St James’s Street, more or less opposite the triple ancient glories of wine merchants Berry Bros and Rudd, Lock the hatter and Lobb the boot-maker, was also on the list of establishments offering us August and august hospitality.

I had taken Ben Elton to the Oxford and Cambridge, and he had revelled in the wonders and absurdities of it. The lecterns on the dining-room tables for those solitary lunchers or diners who wanted to read, the strange brass and mahogany weighing machines with an ancient book next to them in which members could record their weight, the library, the barber shop and the billiard-room had all appealed to his fondness for the dottily traditional. His word for it all was ‘crusty’, crusty as in old port and crusty as in the crabby and cantankerous old men that infest such places.

I called him up one day in the late July of ’85.

‘Ben, time for a crusty.’

‘You’re on, Bing, and that’s perfect because I want to talk to you anyway.’ Ben always called me Bing or Bingable and does so to this day. I cannot quite remember why.

‘If we make it next week,’ I said, ‘I can offer you all kinds of clubs, but the one I think we’d enjoy most is the Carlton.’

‘I love the name already.’

We met for a preliminary gargle at the Ritz on the evening of the following Thursday. You may think it wrong, or hypocritical, or snobbish, or grotesque, or pathetic for two such figures in their twenties to swan about as if they were characters in a Wodehouse or Waugh novel, and perhaps it was. I would try and ask you to believe that there was an element – I won’t say of irony – of playfulness perhaps, of self-conscious awareness of the ridiculous nature of what we were doing and the ludicrous figures that we cut. Two Jewish comics pretending to be flâneurs of the old school. Ben was more obviously a visitor to this world, I more inexcusably connected to it or more successfully, and therefore more creepily, giving off an air of belonging. I was a genuine member, after all, of a London club and over the next decades I was to join at least four more as well as half a dozen of the new kind of members-only media watering holes that were about to burst into the world of Soho bohemia.

We strolled down St James’s Street, and I told Ben about Brooks’s and White’s, the Whig and Tory bastions that glowered across the street at each other. White’s was and is the most aristocratic and exclusive of all the London clubs, but the Carlton, which we were now approaching, remains the most overtly political.

We crossed the threshold, and I waved what I hoped was a nonchalant hand towards the uniformed porter in his mahogany guichet.

‘Oxford and Cambridge,’ I said. ‘I have my membership card somewhere …’

‘That’s all right, sir,’ said the porter, his eyes taking Ben in without flickering. Ben was, as he knew one had to be in such places, dressed in a suit and tie, but there are suits and ties and there are ways of wearing suits and ties. My charcoal tailor-made three-piece, New and Lingwood shirt with faintly distressed silk Cherubs tie looked as if they belonged, whereas Ben’s Mr Byrite appearance suggested (and I mean this warmly and lovingly) a bus-driver reluctantly togged up for his sister’s wedding.

We ascended to the first-floor dining-room. Ben nearly exploded as we passed the bust of a woman at the foot of the stairs.

‘Bing,’ he hissed, ‘that’s Thatch!’

‘Of course it is,’ I said with what I hoped was blithe ease. ‘This is the Carlton Club after all.’

As we sat down I broke the news that I had brought him to the very citadel of modern Conservatism, the club where the present-day party had been born and constituted. Margaret Thatcher’s image was certainly represented, as were those of all the Tory leaders since Peel. Ben was dazed and delighted to find himself right plumb spang in the centre of the enemy’s camp. We both felt childishly mischievous, like children who have found the key to their parents’ drinks cabinet.

‘Not many people about,’ said Ben.

‘Well, being August, most of the members will be out of town. They’ll be returning from the Riviera in time for the grouse.’

‘We shall go up to the moors ourselves next week,’ said Ben. ‘I shall be your scamp.’

Scamp was the word Ben used as a generic term for a mixture of Oxford scout, Cambridge gyp, manservant, old retainer and loyal page. We maintained a peculiar fiction of myself as a crusty old country squire and Ben as my trusty scamp. Crusty and Trusty.

‘Anyway,’ I said. ‘Here it is, the Carlton Club. The beating heart of the Establishment. But when I called you up, you said you wanted to talk to me?’

‘That’s right. Thing is, Bing. As you know, Dickie C and I have been working on this new Blackadder.’

‘Indeed,’ I said.

‘Well, there’s a part in it for you.’

‘Really?’

‘I won’t lie to you,’ he said. ‘It’s not like the greatest character in the world. He’s called Lord Melchett and he stands behind the Queen and sucks up to her. He and Blackadder hate each other. He’s a kind of chamberlain figure, you know?’

‘Ben, of course I’ll do it,’ I said.

‘Yeah? That’s great!’

I could see out of the corner of my eye that an ancient gentleman a couple of tables away had been having difficulty accepting Ben’s vowel sounds as they ricocheted off the portraits of Wellington and Churchill and into his disbelieving ears. For the past ten minutes he had been spluttering and growling into his soup with growing venom. He looked up at Ben’s last exclamation, and I recognized the blotched, jowly and furious countenance of the Lord Chancellor, Quintin Hogg, now Lord Hailsham. He had his napkin tucked into his shirt collar like Oliver Hardy and his mixed expression of outrage, disbelief and reluctant desire to know more put me in mind of a maiden aunt who has just had a flasher open his raincoat at her in the church tea-rooms.

All in all, our Carlton Club adventure was one of the happier and more memorable evenings of my life.



As Lord Melchett in Blackadder II.





Courtly Comedy

It is probable that if you have bothered to buy, steal or borrow this book you will have watched or at least know about Blackadder but you will forgive me if I describe its principal features for the benefit of Americans and others who may be less familiar. The second series of this ‘historical sitcom’ is set in Elizabethan England with Rowan Atkinson in the title role of Edmund, Lord Blackadder, a suave, scheming, manipulative and attractively amoral courtier. Tony Robinson and Tim McInnerny play his grubby servant Baldrick and idiot friend Lord Percy respectively, as they had in the first series. In the royal court Miranda Richardson plays the young Queen Elizabeth, Patsy Byrne her breast-fixated nurse and I the character Ben had described to me, Lord Melchett – a sort of William Cecil, Lord Burghley figure, all forked beard, forked tongue and fur-lined cloak.

We rehearsed at the BBC’s North Acton rehearsal rooms, just as I had for The Cellar Tapes, The Crystal Cube and the ‘Bambi’ episode of The Young Ones. The director was the very charming and capable Mandy Fletcher. I ought to explain the difference between a director for multi-camera television and a film or theatre director. In the latter two worlds the director is absolute monarch, in charge of all the creative decisions and ultimately responsible for what is seen on screen or stage. In television it is the producer who takes that role. Our producer was John Lloyd. Mandy’s job was to think about how the cameras would move and be coordinated in order best to capture what John and the cast constructed. Which is not to downplay her role and her skill, it is just that most people might think the director is the one running the show in terms of script, performance, comic ideas, directing the actors and so on. All that, especially since neither Richard Curtis nor Ben Elton liked to attend rehearsals, came from our producer.

When histories of British television comedy are written, the name of John Lloyd is certain to figure prominently. A graduate of Cambridge and the Footlights, he was a contemporary of his friend and occasional collaborator Douglas Adams. After Cambridge he moved to BBC radio, where he created The News Quiz, Quote Unquote and other quizzes and comedy shows before making the move to television with Not the Nine O’Clock News. Richard Curtis was the lead writer on that show, and Rowan Atkinson one of its stars. It was natural, then, that John should produce Rowan and Richard’s The Black Adder. The year after that he produced the first series of Spitting Image, which he continued to work on until the end, as well as producing the subsequent three major series of Blackadder, including its occasional minor outbursts in charitable or other specials. In 2003 he and I started work on another child of his fertile mind, QI. As it happens, although he will not thank me for pointing it out, he had worked as a script consultant on a couple of episodes of Alfresco too, so it can be seen that my career has run in harness with his for the best part of thirty years. He is, I should point out at this stage, quite mad.

Success has a dozen parents and failure is an orphan, as I mentioned before when talking about the genesis of the ‘Bambi’ episode of The Young Ones. As it happened, although we had no idea while we were rehearsing it, Blackadder II turned out to be a great success with the public. I have no more authority in pronouncing why this was than anyone else might have, connected or unconnected to it. What Ben Elton brought to the party in terms of energy, fantastic wordplay, brilliant anachronisms and general jeux d’esprit cannot be overestimated, as cannot Richard Curtis’s ear, wit and skill nor his uncanny understanding of Rowan’s range and power. The transformation of Tony Robinson’s Baldrick from a rather smart sidekick in the first series to a most terrifyingly dim-witted lowlife in the second was also crucial for the show’s success. Tim McInnerny’s Lord Percy was divine, as was Patsy Byrne’s Nursie. Many would cite Miranda Richardson’s performance as a young and terrifyingly unstable Queenie as one of the absolute highlights of that series and among the best comic characterizations ever seen on British television.

We had the most marvellous guests too. Tom Baker played a seadog called Captain Redbeard Rum. His performance was superb, and he himself was entirely charming. While a scene that didn’t involve him was being rehearsed he would disappear and return with a tray fully laden with sweets, crisps, chocolates, sandwiches, nuts and snacks, which he would hand round to everyone in the room, often nipping off again to reload. During his Doctor Who days he had been quite the party animal in the pubs and clubs of London and often used to fetch up at the North Acton rehearsal rooms at three or four in the morning, where friendly security guards would admit him and let him sleep on a rehearsal mat until morning. Production assistants would arrive and wake him up for work. He had a way of gazing at you with grave bulging eyes that made it rather hard to determine whether he thought you an idiot or a god.

Miriam Margolyes made an appearance as the puritanical face-slapping Lady Whiteadder in a show called ‘Beer’. Rik Mayall’s Captain Flashheart exploded into the world like a firework display and, to my especial delight, Hugh appeared as a guest twice, firstly as one of Blackadder’s flatulent drinking companions in ‘Beer’ and then, more magnificently, as a deranged Germanic super-villain and master of disguise in the final episode, at the conclusion of which we all somehow ended up dead.

Having bowed and paid due homage to all these great contributors I have to turn to what was for me the real miracle: Rowan Atkinson’s performance as Edmund. I would watch him in rehearsal, and my mouth would drop open in stunned admiration. I had never before come close to such an extraordinary comic talent. I had seen him on stage at Edinburgh and laughed until I weed, I had admired him in Not the Nine O’Clock News and I had watched his rather disturbing character in the first series, but the Edmund of Blackadder II was a revelation. The urbanity, sarcasm, vocal control, minimalism and physical restraint were not sides of Rowan I had ever seen before. This Edmund was sexy, assured, playful, dynamic, debonair, soigné and charismatic.

Rowan, it is well known, is a private and unassuming figure. He read Electrical Engineering at Newcastle before completing a Masters degree at the Queen’s College, Oxford, and has always retained something of the manner of a quiet and industrious scientist about him. It is hard when meeting him to see quite where the comedy comes from. When making the best man’s speech at his wedding some years later I tried to explain this. I said that it was as if the Almighty had suddenly noticed he had a full decade’s allocation of comic talent, a supply that he had forgotten to dole out more or less evenly amongst the population as was His usual divine practice. For a joke he decided to give the whole load to the least likely person he could find. He looked down at the north-east of England and saw a diffident, studious young engineer wandering the streets of Jesmond, dreaming of transistors and tractors, and zapped him full of all that comedy talent. He gave him none of the usual showbiz pizzazz or yearning for fame, adulation and laughter, just the gigantic consignment of talent alone. I still wake up at night sometimes with a surge of shame fearing that I expressed this thought badly and that it sounded less affectionate and admiring than it might, that it somehow ignored the skill, concentration, commitment and conscious application of that talent that makes Rowan the authentic comic genius he is. Aside from all of this he is a delightful, kindly, sweet-natured and wise individual whose personal human qualities quite match his comic attainments.

When Rik Mayall came to rehearsals for his episode in Blackadder II, the contrast between his style and Rowan’s was astonishing. It was like seeing a Vermeer next to a van Gogh, one all exquisite detail with the subtlest and most invisible working and the other a riot of wild and thickly applied brushstrokes. Two utterly different aesthetics, each outstandingly brilliant. With Rik you could see the character grow out of his own personality. Flashheart was an emphasized and extreme version of Rik. In Rowan’s case it was as if Blackadder was somehow conjured up from nowhere. He emerged from Rowan like an extra limb. I am as capable of envy and resentment as the next man, but when you are in a room with two people who possess an order of talent that you know you can never even dream of attaining, it is actually a relief to be able to do no more than lean back and admire like a dewy-eyed groupie.

My make-up on Blackadder II was done by a divinely pretty girl called Sunetra Sastry. From a Brahmin-caste Indian family, she was bright, funny and as captivatingly alluring as any girl I had met for years. I was quite seriously considering asking her out on a date, when Rowan timidly approached me one morning during rehearsals for the second episode and asked if I would mind swapping make-up artists with him. Since he had grown his own beard for the part, unlike me, who had to have my large excrescence glued on with spirit gum every week, I thought this rather odd: his make-up sessions lasted as long as it took to powder the tip of his nose.

‘Don’t you like the one you’ve got?’ I said.

‘N-no, it’s not that, she’s splendid. It’s just that well …’ He gave me a look of uncharacteristic intensity.

‘Oh!’ I said, as the penny dropped. ‘My dear fellow. Of course. Yes.’

All ideas of my asking Sunetra out left me, and over the course of the remaining five weeks I watched as she and Rowan grew closer and closer. They had been together for five years before they at last married in New York City. As the best man, I flew out to be there and record the ceremony on eight-millimetre film. They now have two children and twenty years of marriage behind them, but I still sometimes wonder what would have happened if I had been bold enough and quick enough on my feet to have asked Sunetra out straight away.

‘Oh, you should have done!’ Sunetra often says to me. ‘I’d have gone out with you.’ But I know how happy she is and how right it was that I stayed silent.

Hang on, Stephen, you’re gay, aren’t you? Indeed I am, but, as I was to tell a newspaper reporter some years later, I am only ‘90 per cent gay’, which is of course pretty damned gay, but every now and again on my path through life I have met a woman in the 10 per cent bracket. Caroline Oulton at Cambridge was one, although I never told her so, and Sunetra another.

The Blackadder rehearse-record rhythms somehow made the time fly by. On Tuesday morning we would read through the script, with Richard and sometimes Ben in attendance. John would wince and clutch his brow and shake his head at the dire impossibility of it all – not the most tactful way to endear himself to the writers or indeed the performers. He never meant to transmit disapproval or disappointment, the tutting and moaning were just his way of gearing himself up for the work of the week ahead. Next, each scene, starting at the beginning, would slowly have ‘legs’ put on it. As the show was blocked out in this fashion, Mandy would make notes and build up her camera script, and John would grimace and sigh and smoke and pace and growl. His perfectionism and refusal to be satisfied was part of the reason Blackadder worked. Every line, plot twist and action was taken, rubbed between his fingers, sniffed and passed, rejected or pulled in for servicing and improvement. We would all join in the process of joke polishing or ‘fluffing’, as John called it. I relished participating in these sessions which over the years became an absolute characteristic of Blackadder rehearsals. Visiting guest actors would often sit for hours working on a crossword or reading a book as we built up the epithets and absurd similes.

I picture Richard and Ben reading this and snorting with outrage. ‘Hang on, we presented you with the scripts and devised the characters and the style. Don’t go pretending that it was all your work.’ Ben and Richard did indeed create the style, the storylines and most of the jokes. We added and subtracted in rehearsal, but they were the writers, there can be no doubt of that. My admiration for their work was and is extreme and unconditional. Nonetheless, as anyone who spent any time in Blackadder rehearsals then or later will confirm, the days were always a constant coffee and cigarettes grind of tweaking, refinement and emendation.

Sunday was the taping night, the night we performed the show in front of an audience. Ben would act as warm-up man, introducing the characters and setting the series in context. This was important, for there was always a detectable air of disappointment emanating from the audience. No part of the current series would yet have been broadcast, so they would be staring at an unfamiliar set and fretting at the absence of the characters they had known from the previous series. When they came to Blackadder II they were sorry not to have Brian Blessed there as the King; when they came to Blackadder the Third recordings they missed Queenie; and when they arrived for recordings of Blackadder Goes Forth they wanted to see Prince George and Mrs Miggins.

For all that, it was a happy experience. The Saturday after the taping of the last episode of Blackadder II Richard Curtis held a party at his house in Oxfordshire. It was a glorious summer’s day, and, as we all wanted to watch television, Richard unwound an extension cord and put the set on a wooden chair in the shade of an apple tree. We sat on the grass and watched Live Aid all the way through to the end of the American broadcast from Philadelphia.

‘We should do something similar,’ Richard said.

‘How’s that?’ I wasn’t sure what he could mean.

‘Comedians can raise money too. Look at what John Cleese did for Amnesty with those Secret Policeman’s Balls.’

‘So you mean a Comedians’ Live Aid show?’

Richard nodded. He had already been germinating Comic Relief in his head for some time. Now, almost twenty-five years later, he has devoted six or seven months of his time every other year to an organization that, love or loathe the enforced custardy jollities of its biennial television pratfest, has raised hundreds of millions of pounds to comfort those who have sorely needed it.





Coral Christmas, Cassidy, C4, Clapless Clapham, Cheeky Chappies and Coltrane’s Cock

With Blackadder II in the can, I was called up by Richard Armitage.

‘Happy to say that they want to put on Me and My Girl in Australia. Mike will need you there to help with changes that we can try out for Broadway.’

I didn’t really believe that Broadway would happen. How could Americans possibly respond to Cockney capers and rhyming slang with anything other than blank stares and fidgety coughs? Australia seemed like a wonderful idea, however, and Mike and I flew out with the rest of the core production team to rehearse an Australian cast in the Melbourne Arts Centre. I wish I remembered more about the production. I think I fiddled about with the lyrics a little and changed one or two scenes, but that is all that springs to mind. It was towards the end of the year, and Mike and I decided that it would be fun to stay on and Christmas up in Queensland. He chose Hamilton, one of the Whitsunday Islands of the Coral Reef. I spent almost all of Christmas Day in my hotel room shivering, throbbing and shaking with sunstroke and sunburn, much to the amusement of Billy Connolly and Pamela Stephenson, who were staying in the same hotel.

Back in England Hugh and I turned our minds to the Channel 4 show that Paul Jackson had mentioned to us. Seamus Cassidy, the young commissioner at C4, was anxious for something akin to America’s long-running Saturday Night Live. Our show, he decided, was to be called Saturday Live. I thought of him ever after, not unaffectionately, as Shameless Cassidy.

Stand-up was taking over the world. Our brand of sketch comedy, it seemed to Hugh and me, was in danger of looking more and more dated as each month passed, certainly as far as the prospect of live TV was concerned. The problem with being a duo rather than a solo performer is that you speak to each other, rather than out front to the audience. We had in the past written a certain number of sketches, the Shakespeare Masterclass for example, in which the audience could be directly addressed, but for much of our time we played characters locked in mini-dramas with a fourth wall between us and the watching world. Out of some act of rare reckless abandonment we decided that before putting ourselves in front of the cameras for this new show we should practise by performing in a comedy club. One of the premiere venues at that time was Jongleurs in Clapham, and thither we went for one night, sandwiched between a young Julian Clary and Lenny Henry. Julian performed as ‘The Joan Collins Fan Club’ in those days and shared the stage with his little terrier ‘Fanny the Wonderdog’. He did very well, I recall. When Hugh and I left the stage after our fifteen minutes and puffed out our usual ‘Christ they hated us’ (Hugh) and ‘It wasn’t so bad’ (me), we stayed back to watch Lenny. I remember thinking how wonderful it must be to be known and loved by an audience. All your work is done before you go on stage. Lenny entered to an enormous cheer and, or at least so it seemed to me, only had to open his mouth to have the audience writhing with joy and drumming their feet on the floor with approval. Hugh and I were unknown, Blackadder II hadn’t aired yet, and The Crystal Cube and Alfresco had been watched by seven people, all of whom wanted to kill us. That night at Jongleurs we sweated blood as we treated the audience to our exquisitely wrought phrases, cunning jokes and deft characterizations only to be rewarded with vague titters and polite but sporadic applause. Lenny came on, did a bird call, boomed a hello and the building almost collapsed. This is to take nothing away from him at all. He had built up a rapport over the years and he had the gift that can guarantee a good time in a comedy club. He was relaxed and he made the audience relax. Hugh and I might have hidden our nerves and anxiety as best we could, but from the beginning we were working the audience rather than welcoming them with any confidence into our world. A tense audience might admire our writing and performing, but they are never going to give us the great rolling waves of love they sent out to Lenny. Later, when we were familiar figures and went on stage to gusts of welcome, I would remember that night at Clapless Clapham, as I always thought of it, and thank my lucky stars that I no longer had to prove myself in quite the same way. Yet, having said that, there came an evening some years later where I was able clearly to witness the reverse effect. I directed a number of ‘Hysteria’ benefit shows for the Terrence Higgins Trust in the late eighties and early nineties. For the third one I had the duty of welcoming on to the stage a very well-known comic. He entered to a thunderous ovation – they were so pleased to see him. He exited to only a … respectable level of applause. The next act was new. No one out there had any idea who he was or what they might expect. I did my best as compère to get the audience on his side.

‘Dear ladies, darling gentlemen, I have no doubt in the world that you will give the next artist your warmest and wildest welcome. He is a brilliant young comic, I know you’ll adore him – please greet the wonderful Eddie Izzard!’ They were polite and they did their best, but they would so much rather have screamed a John Cleese or Billy Connolly on to the stage.

I stood in the wings and watched as Eddie left the stage to a gigantic round of applause. How much better to go on to polite clapping and off to roars than, as the established comic had, to go on to roars and off to polite clapping.

Saturday Live was a bear garden: transmitted live from the biggest studio in London Weekend Television’s South Bank studios, it featured a large central stage, side stages for the bands, random giant inflatables floating above and a vast arena for the audience of groundlings, mostly young fashion-conscious people who milled about getting in the way of the cameras and harassed floor managers in a style that was becoming the established fashion in hip youth TV, a style that veered between sulky disaffection and hysterical whooping adulation. Hugh was convinced that they were more interested in how their hair looked on screen than in anything we might be saying or doing to try and amuse them.



The man who put the turd in Saturday Live. I cannot recall a single thing about that sketch. Why the rolled-up trouser leg?

A month or so earlier we had gone to the Comedy Store to see a new comedian about whom we had heard great things. His name was Harry Enfield and he performed a stand-up routine as a most marvellously curmudgeonly and perverse old gentleman, a character he had consciously modelled on the persona Gerard Hoffnung adopted in his legendary interviews with Charles Richardson. Harry worked on Spitting Image as an impressionist and had, like us, been booked for Saturday Live.

He had bumped into and become friends with Paul Whitehouse and Charlie Higson, our painter-decorators, and together Harry and Paul had developed a character based on Adam, Paul’s Graeco-Cockney kebab-shop owner. Now named Stavros, he was working well as a puppet on Spitting Image, and Harry fancied the idea of trying him out in the flesh for Saturday Live. Hugh and I rather envied Harry the stability of having one returning character. Each week for the twelve of the first run of Saturday Live we had to think of something new to do. Each week the blank sheet of paper and accusatory pen, or rather the blank screen, flashing cursor and accusatory keyboard. The sketches that seemed to work best in the insanely hot, loud and unstable atmosphere of the studio were the ones, as we had imagined, where Hugh and I talked out to the audience. We developed a line of talk-show parodies where Hugh played a character called Peter Mostyn, who interviewed me in increasingly strange formats.



More Saturday Live: with Hugh, Harry Enfield and Ben Elton. Why the electric carving knife, if that’s what it is? I remember nothing of this moment.

‘Hello and welcome to Stealing a Car Stereo With. I’m Peter Mostyn and tonight I’ll be stealing a car stereo with Nigel Davenant, Shadow Home Secretary and Member of Parliament for South Reason. Nigel, hello and welcome to Stealing a Car Stereo With …’ and so on.

I remember that Mostyn sketch with especial clarity (most of our Saturday Live experiences are a blur of jumbled memories: the brain can be kind that way) because it allowed us to film away from the feared studio audience and down in the LWT underground car park. With the show being live it was rather tense. We had some sort of iron punch with which to smash the nearside window of a car and pull out the radio. Rather than using the friable and safe sugar glass usually favoured as a prop we were going to do it on the real thing, a car belonging to someone in the production crew.

‘Right – so, Shadow Home Secretary, have you ever stolen a car stereo before?’

‘Ooh, not since I was a young parliamentary assistant.’

‘Feeling confident?’

‘Give it a damned good go, anyway …’

‘That’s the spirit! This is the kind of tool most car thieves use. One firm blow and then, quick as you can, out with the stereo. But while you’re doing that, let me ask you, was politics always your first love?’

‘Oh, no, Susanna was my first love, then a boy called Tony and then politics.’

‘Right, has politics changed much since you first entered the house as a young man after that by-election in 1977?’

And, which was the purpose of these sketches, Hugh would continue an earnest and commonplace interview as if we were doing the most normal thing in the world. Later scenarios included ‘Introducing My Grandfather To’, ‘Photocopying My Genitals With’ and ‘Flying a Light Aircraft Without Having Had Any Formal Instruction With’.

It took about six heavy bangs on the glass to smash the window that night, I recall. I could clearly hear the alarmed voice of Geoff Posner, the director, in the earpieces of the two cameramen and assistant floor manager each time the punch bounced harmlessly off the window. ‘Jesus! Hell! Oh, for fuck’s sake!’

Hugh improvised nobly. ‘Would you say, Nigel, that new European lamination standards have succeeded in toughening glass since your early days stealing car stereos?’

‘That’s … bang … right, Peter. I would … bang … say … exactly … bang … that. Plus I’ve lost a lot of strength in my arms due to bang … Crash!! … ah, that’s got it …’ What I had lost a lot of strength in my arms due to I fortunately never had to declare.

The only other sketch I remember with any clarity is seared into my memory like a brand because it necessitated a visit to a hypnotist.

I am not able, as I have discussed before, to sing. By which I mean I am really not able to sing, much as I am not able to fly through the air by flapping my arms. Not. Able. It is not a question of me doing it badly but a question of me not being able to do it at all. I have told you what my singing voice does to those cocky and wrong-headed fools who have skipped about the place proclaiming, ‘Why, that’s nonsense! Everyone can sing …’ Hugh, as we know, sings marvellously, as he does most things marvellously, but Stephen just plain doesn’t. I think I can sing when I’m on my own, in the shower for instance, but there is no way of testing it. If I imagine for a second that there is anybody in the house, or in the garden, or within a hundred yards of me, I freeze up. And that would include a microphone, so my singing is like a physicist’s quantum event: any observation fatally alters its outcome.

Well, came the day in the middle of the second series of Saturday Live that I found that Hugh had painted me, or I had painted myself, into a dreadful corner. Somehow a routine had been written in which it was essential for me to sing. Hugh was performing some other crucial function in the sketch, and I could not but accept that I was going to have to sing. Live. On television.

For three days I was in a complete panic, trembling, sweating, moaning, yawning, needing a pee every ten minutes – all the symptoms of extreme nervous tension. At last Hugh could take it no more.

‘All right then. We’ll just have to write another sketch.’

‘No, no! I’ll be fine.’ Annoyingly it was a good sketch. Much as I dreaded the prospect of its approach, I knew that we should do it. ‘Really. I’ll be fine.’

Hugh took in my quaking knees, ashen complexion and terrified countenance. ‘You won’t be fine,’ he said. ‘I can see that. Look, it’s obviously psychological. You can hammer out a tune on a piano, you can tell one song from another. You’re obviously not tone deaf.’

‘No,’ I said, ‘the problem is I am tone dumb.’

‘Psychological. What you should do is see a hypnotist.’

At three o’clock next afternoon I rang the doorbell of the Maddox Street consulting rooms of one Michael Joseph, Clinical Hypnotist.

He turned out to be Hungarian by birth. Hungarian, I suppose because of my grandfather, is my favourite accent in all the world. I shan’t attempt to write ‘Vot’ for ‘What’ and ‘deh’ for ‘the’, you will just have to imagine a voice like George Solti’s weaving its way into my brain.

‘Tell me the issue that brings you here,’ he asked, expecting, I imagine, smoking or weight control or something along those lines.

‘I have to sing tomorrow night.’

‘Excuse me?’

‘Tomorrow night I have to sing. Live on television.’

I outlined the nature of the problem. ‘You say you can never sing, you have never sung?’

‘Well, I think it must be a mental block. I have a good enough ear to be able usually to recognize some keys. E flat major, C minor and D major, for instance. But the moment I have to sing in front of anybody else I just get a hammering in my ears, my throat constricts, my mouth goes dry and the most tuneless, arrhythmic horror comes out.’

‘I see, I see. Perhaps you should put the palms of your hands on your knees, that would be pleasantly comfortable, I think. You know, if you feel your hands on your legs, it is amazing how they seem almost to melt into the flesh, is it not? Soon it is hard to tell which is your hands and which is your legs, don’t they? They are as one. And as this is happening it now feels as if you are being lowered down a well, haven’t you? Down into the dark. But my voice is like the rope that keeps you confident that you will not be lost. My voice will be able to pull you back up, but for the moment it is dropping you down and down and until you are in the warm and in the dark. Yes? No?’

‘Mm …’ I felt myself slipping into a state – not of unconsciousness, for I was fully awake and aware – of willing relaxation and contented stupor. Light closed around me until I was snug and securely held in the well of darkness and warmth that he had described.

‘Tell me when it was that you decided that you could not sing?’

And now, quite unexpectedly, there popped fully formed into my head a perfectly clear memory of cong. prac.

Congregational practice is held every Saturday morning in the prep school gym/chapel/assembly hall. The music master, Mr Hemuss, takes us through the hymns that will be sung in tomorrow’s service. It is my first term. I am seven years old and just getting used to boarding 200 miles from home. I stand at the end of a row with a hymnbook in my hand joining in as the school sings its way through the first verse of ‘Jerusalem the Golden’. Kirk, the duty prefect, saunters up and down the aisles, making sure everyone is behaving. Suddenly he stops right next to me and holds up his hand.

‘Sir, sir … Fry is singing flat!’

There is tittering. Mr Hemuss calls for hush. ‘On your own then, Fry.’

I don’t know what singing flat means, but I know it must be terrible.

‘Come on,’ Hemuss strikes his hand down on the keyboard to sound a chord and belts out the opening line in a strong tenor, ‘Jerusalem the golden …’

I try to pick it up from there. ‘With milk and honey blest …’ The school erupts with hoots of derisive laughter as a husky tuneless squeak emerges from me.

‘Yes, well. In future I think it would be better if you mimed,’ says Mr Hemuss. Kirk grins triumphantly and moves on, and I am left alone, hot, pink and quaking with humiliation, shame and terror.

The memory shrinks and moves away as Michael Joseph’s reassuring Magyar tones continue to solace me. ‘It has been a painful memory, but now it is one that makes you smile. For you can see that this is what has been locking up the music inside you all these years. Tomorrow evening you have to sing, yes?’

‘Yes.’ My voice seeming to come from a long way away.

‘When you have to sing, is there a … how you say … a cue? Is there some cue for you to sing?’

‘Yes. My friend Hugh turns to me and says, “Hit it, bitch.”’

‘“Hit it, bitch?”’

‘“Hit it, bitch.”’

‘Very good. “Hit it, bitch.” So. Tomorrow, when you stand before the audience you will feel confident, happy and filled with belief in your ability to triumph in this moment. And when you hear the words “Hit it, bitch” all tensions and fears will melt away. This is the signal for you to be able easily to sing the song you need to sing. No fear, no tightness in the throat. Ease, confidence, assurance. Repeat that to me.’

‘When I hear the words “Hit it, bitch” all tensions and fears will melt away. It is the signal for me to be able to sing the song I need to sing. No fear. No tightness in the throat. Ease. Confidence. Assurance.’

‘Excellent. And now I shall pull on the rope and bring you up to the surface. As I pull I count down from twenty. When I reach “ten” you will begin to awaken, refreshed and happy, quite able to remember our conversation and all its details. At “five” your eyes will begin to open. So. Twenty, nineteen …’

I stumbled away, rather amazed that this memory of cong. prac. had been revealed and fully confident that I would indeed be able to sing when the moment came. I believe I even hummed to myself as I walked from Maddox Street to the Oxford Street tube station.

The following evening I told Hugh that, if he muffed his cue and said ‘Hit it, baby,’ or ‘Cue it, bitch,’ or anything like that, then our whole enterprise would fail. All was well, the moment came, Hugh delivered the line correctly, and sounds came out of my mouth in more or less the right order and employing more or less the correct musical pitches.

Did the experience unlock singing for me? Absolutely not. I am as hopeless as ever I was. At weddings and funerals I still prefer to mime. At John Schlesinger’s funeral at a synagogue in St John’s Wood some years ago the person I stood next to said to me encouragingly, ‘Come on, Stephen – you’re not singing. Have a go!’

‘Believe me, Paul, you don’t want me to,’ I said. Besides, I was having a much better time listening to him.

‘No. Go on!’

So I joined in the chorus.

‘You’re right,’ Paul McCartney conceded. ‘You can’t sing.’

I suppose, in career terms, Saturday Live was a good move. It was watched by a large audience and generally went down well. It was especially successful for Ben, who moved from being a regular contributor to permanent host. His sign-off, ‘My name’s Ben Elton, good night!’, became the catchphrase of the show until Harry and Paul, tiring of the very successful Stavros, devised a new character for Harry to play. They came up with a loud-mouthed Sarf London plasterer who fanned his wad of dosh at the audience and shouted ‘Loadsamoney!’ with gleeful, exultant braggadocio. He seemed to symbolize the second act of the Thatcher play, an era of materialism, greed and contempt for those left behind. As with Johnny Speight and Warren Mitchell’s Alf Garnett, much of the audience seemed either to be deaf to or chose to disregard Paul and Harry’s satirical intent, raising Loadsamoney to almost folk-heroic status.

Ben, Harry, Hugh and I fell into the habit of winding down, after the recordings, in a Covent Garden club called the Zanzibar, usually bringing with us the guest comedians or musicians of the week.

Wedged in a semicircle of banquette one night, I had the opportunity of observing Robbie Coltrane’s romantic and poetic seduction technique. He picked up the hand of the girl sitting next to him.

‘What fine, delicate hands you have,’ he said.

‘Why thank you,’ said the girl.

‘I love women with small hands.’

‘You do?’

‘I do. They make my cock look so much bigger.’

The Zanzibar swarmed with media people. Jimmy Mulville was often there. This sharp, witty, fast-brained Liverpudlian had been something of a legend in Cambridge, having left the year I arrived. He had gone up to read Latin and Ancient Greek, and a less likely Cambridge classicist you could never hope to meet. The rumour was that his father, a docker from Walton, had come home one night when Jimmy was seventeen and said, ‘You’d better do well in your A levels and that, son, because I’ve just been to the bookies and put down a bet on you getting all A grades and a scholarship to Cambridge. Got a good price too.’

‘Christ, Dad!’ Jimmy is reported to have said in shock. ‘How much did you bet?’

‘Everything,’ came the reply. ‘So get studying.’

They say that today’s schoolchildren now suffer more exam pressure than my generation ever did, and generally I have no doubt that this is true, but I don’t suppose many have had to endure pressure of the kind Jimmy did that year. He duly obliged with the straight As and the scholarship.

It is too good a story for me to check up and risk the disappointment of it being proved a distortion or exaggeration. What is certainly true is that, when Jimmy arrived at Jesus in 1975, he brought a wife with him. It is not uncommon for people of a working-class background to wed before they are twenty, but it is very uncommon for students to be married, and how the young Mrs Mulville coped at Cambridge I do not know. Jimmy became President of the Footlights in 1977 and by the time I am writing about he was starring in and writing the Channel 4 comedy Who Dares Wins with his Cambridge contemporary Rory McGrath. He would go on to found Hat Trick, one of the first independent television production companies, famous for bringing shows like Have I Got News for You to television and slightly less famous for giving shows like my own This Is David Lander an airing.

Who Dares Wins had established itself as something of a cult, singled out as being responsible for the post-closing-time scheduling slot that Channel 4 made its own. Its beery style was not very close to the kind of thing Hugh and I did, but for me the flashes of brilliance in the writing more than made up for its laddish manner. It gave the world one of my favourite jokes. There is something very pleasing about one-word punchlines.

The show nearly always ended with a long, complex party scene, shot in a one-camera single take. In one of these episodes Jimmy approaches Rory and picks up a can of beer. Just as he’s bringing it up to his lips, Rory warns him, ‘Um, I’ve been using that as an ashtray actually.’ Jimmy gives him a hard look, says, ‘Tough,’ and swigs.

Another occasional habitué of the Zanzibar was the remarkable Peter Bennett-Jones, also a Cambridge graduate, and now one of the most powerful managers, agents and producers in British television and film. I remember helping to give him the bumps outside the club at half past two on the morning of his thirtieth birthday and watching in alarm as he dropped to the pavement and announced that he would now do thirty press-ups.

‘You’re an old man!’ I said. ‘You’ll give yourself a heart attack.’

P B-J, as he is universally known, did the thirty and then another twenty, just because.

A friend of mine claims that he was at a loose end in Hong Kong years ago. A hotel concierge recommended a restaurant.

‘Go Kowloonside and ask for Chou Lai’s.’

On the quay at Kowloon he was pointed to a junk that was just leaving. He leapt aboard.

‘Chou Lai’s?’ he asked. Everyone on board nodded.

After half an hour’s chugging through choppy waters he was dropped off on an island. Nothing. He thought he had been (almost literally) shanghaied. After what seemed an eternity another junk phutted its way to the jetty.

‘Chou Lai?’ called the skipper, and once more my friend hopped aboard.

An hour followed in which he ploughed deeper through the South China Sea, beginning to fear for his life. At last he was deposited on yet another island, but this time there was at least a restaurant, strung with lights and vibrating with music. Chou Lai himself came forward, a bonhomous fellow with an eyepatch that completed the superbly Condradian feel of my friend’s adventure.

‘Hello, very welcome. Tell me, you American?’

‘No, I’m English as a matter of fact.’

‘English! Ah! You know P B-J?’

One wonders how many perplexed English customers had been asked that question without having the slightest idea who or what a ‘P B-J’ might be. My friend did know but doubted Chou Lai could possibly mean the same one. It turned out he certainly did.

‘Yeah! Pe’er Be’ett-Joes!’

My friend had a free dinner and a ride back to Kowloon in Chou Lai’s private launch.

There you have Peter Bennett-Jones: with his long lean frame, a line in crumpled linen suits and a ripely old-fashioned ‘dear old boy’ manner, he looks and sounds the part of a superannuated colonial district commissioner from the pages of Somerset Maugham, yet is younger than Mick Jagger and as sharp, clever and powerful a force in London’s media world as you could find.

I was fortunate or unfortunate enough to miss the evening at the Zanzibar when Keith Allen, one of the pioneers of alternative comedy and a man I was to come to know well, stood up on the bar and began to throw bottles back and forth, destroying much of the stock as well as most of the mirrors and fittings. Keith did get arrested and on his return from a short stretch found himself permanently banned, or Zanzibarred as I preferred to put it. The owner, Tony Macintosh, was good-natured enough not to exclude him from his new establishment, the Groucho, which he and Mary-Lou Sturridge were on the point of opening in Soho.

My years of hurling myself headlong into the world of Soho Bohemia were still ahead of me, but I was beginning to look at figures like Keith Allen with a kind of admiration tinged with fear. They seemed to own the London in which I still felt like a shy visitor, a London which was beginning to vibrate with enormous energy. I was afraid to enter the fashionable nightclubs like the Titanic and the Limelight; after all, they seemed to be about nothing but dancing and getting drunk, neither of which I was very interested in, and even the Zanzibar was not a place I would ever dream of visiting except in a group, but a demon in me whispered that it was wrong for me to be nothing but a machine for churning out words. ‘You owe it to yourself to live a little, Harry…’ as Clint breathes to himself in Dirty Harry.

Who was I at this time? I still found that people were bothered by my front, my ease, my apparent – oh, I don’t know – effortlessness, invulnerability, lack of need? Something in me riled … no not riled, sometimes riled perhaps, but mostly intrigued or baffled … something in me intrigued or baffled, triggered a mixture of exasperation and curiosity.

How could somebody be so muffled up against the cruel winds of the world, so armed against the missiles of fate, so complete? Be great to see them drunk. See their guard down. Find out what makes them tick.

I really do believe that there are those who would like and trust me better if they saw me weeping into a whisky, making a fool of myself, getting aggressive, maudlin and drunkenly out of control. I have never found those states in others anything other than tiring, awkward, embarrassing and fantastically dull, but I am quite sure that people would cherish a view of me in that condition at least once in a while. As it happens I am almost never out of control no matter how much I drink. My limbs may well lose coordination, but they have so little to begin with that it is hard to tell the difference. But I certainly never become aggressive or violent or weepy. This is clearly a fault.

Back then I could see that outsiders looking in on the Stephen Fry they encountered saw a man who had drawn life’s winning lottery ticket. I did not seem to have it in me to project the vulnerability, fear, insecurity, doubt, inadequacy, puzzlement and inability to cope that I so very often felt.

The signs were writ large for those with the wit to read. The cars alone screamed so much, surely? An Aston Martin, a Jaguar XJ12, a Wolseley 15/50, an Austin Healey 100/6 in concourse condition, an Austin Westminster, an MG Magnette, an MGB roadster …

People saw me riding around in these woody, leathery chariots and thought them the automobile equivalent of the tweed jacket and cavalry twills in which I still dressed myself. ‘Good old Stephen. He’s from another world, really. Quintessentially English. Old-fashioned values. Cricket, crosswords, classic cars, clubland. Bless.’ Or they thought, ‘Pompous, smug Oxbridge twat in his young fogey brogues and snobby cars. What a git.’ And I thought, ‘What a fraud. Half-Jewish poof who doesn’t really know what he’s doing or who he is but is still the same sly, skulking, sweet-scoffing teenager he ever was, never quite fitting in. Destroyed by love, incapable of being loved, unworthy of being loved.’

Till the day I die people will always prefer to see me as strong, comfortable and English, like a good leather club chair. I have learned long ago not to fight it. Besides, and this is more than a question of good manners (although actually good manners are reason enough), why should anyone bleat on about what they feel inside all the time? It isn’t dignified, it isn’t interesting and it isn’t attractive.

Any armchair psychologist can see that someone with my history of teenage Sturm and adolescent Drang (the needy sugar addiction, alienation, wild moods, unhappy sensualism, blighted romance, thieving, expulsions, fraud and imprisonment†) who is suddenly given a new lease of life and the chance to work and make a preposterous amount of money, might well respond as I did and make a series of silly and self-conscious attempts at display, to prove to himself and to the family whose life he made such a misery that he was now someone. Someone who belonged. Look, I have cars and credits cards and club memberships and a country house. I know the name of the head waiter at Le Caprice. I am stitched into England like Connollized leather into the seat of an Aston.

If asked, I would have told you that I was happy. I was happy. I was content, certainly, which is to happy what Pavillon Rouge is to Château Margaux, I suppose, but which will have to do for most of us.


Saturday Live was adjudged a hit, and perhaps as a result of our appearances on it Hugh and I were summoned once more to Jim Moir’s office to see if we couldn’t waggle our cocks in the air and get someone to kneel and suck, or ‘put a show together’, as other, lesser comedy executives might have put it.

After the BBC’s lack of interest in The Crystal Cube, we were leery about high-concept programmes and determined that we should have a shot at committing to screen what we knew best, sketch comedy.

‘Excellent,’ said Richard Armitage. ‘You can do that next year. But first Stephen …’ He rubbed his hands together, and his eyes gleamed. ‘Broadway.’





Clipper Class, Côte Basque and Choreography

Mike Ockrent and I flew to New York together in clipper class, PanAm’s equivalent of business, where you could eat and drink and smoke until your eyes, liver and lungs bubbled. We had a few days, and our job was to dazzle Richard’s potential financiers and co-producers. Robert Lindsay was already there. This was my first-ever trip to the United States, and I had to keep hugging myself. I had often fantasized about America as a child and felt that, when I got there, I should find that I already knew it and love it all the more for that.

I shan’t distress you too much with my thoughts about the Manhattan skyline. If you haven’t visited New York City yourself, you have seen it in film and television and you know that there are a lot of very, very tall buildings crowded together on a relatively small island. You will know there are long tunnels and rattly bridges. There is a central oblong park, wide avenues that run arrow-straight down from one end to the other, rhythmically intersected by numbered streets. You will know that the avenues also have numbers, except when they are called Madison, Park, Lexington, Amsterdam or West End. You will know there is just one exception, one daring diagonal thoroughfare that carves its way down from the top-left corner of the island, ignoring the symmetry of the grid, creating squares, circuses and slivered scalenes of open space as it slices its way south-west – Verdi Square, Dante Park, Columbus Circle, Madison Square, Herald Square, Union Square. You will know that this outlaw diagonal is called Broadway. You will know too that where Broadway meets 42nd Street at Times Square, the heart of New York theatre beats and has done so for a hundred years.

I walked around the theatre district, rubbernecking the neon, bowing to the statue of George M. Cohan (‘Give my regards to Broadway’ it says on the plinth, and to this day I get a lump in my throat every time I see that – more out of veneration for James Cagney’s impersonation of him than out of love or knowledge of Cohan himself), seating myself in the Carnegie Deli to write postcards, subjecting myself to the overwhelming rudeness of the waiters and trying to make sense of a Ruben Special. Everything in New York is exactly what you expect and yet it still astonishes you. Had I come to Manhattan and found that the avenues were winding and bendy, the buildings low and squat and the people slow, drawling and kindly and that there was no trace of that fabled charge of energy that you drew from the very pavements as you walked on them, then I would have had cause to blink and shake my head in wonder. As it is, the town was precisely what I knew it would be, what legend, fable, literature and Tin Pan Alley had long reported it to be, down to the clouds of steam blooming from the manholes, the boatlike wallow of the huge chequer cabs as they bounced and flipped their tyres on the great iron sheets that seemed to have been casually slung by a giant on to the surface of the street and the strange smoky whiff at every street corner that turned out, on inquiry, to be the smell of new-baked pretzel. Just what I had always known. Yet every five steps I took I could not but stop and grin and gasp and stretch my eyes at the theatre of it all, the noise and rudeness and vitality. Affirmation of what we absolutely expect comes as more of a shock than disaffirmation.

Richard’s possible colleagues for the Broadway production were two Americans, James Nederlander, who seemed to own half the theatres in America, and Terry Allen Kramer, who seemed to own half the real estate in Manhattan. They were serious and hard-boiled business people. They had it in their heads that the British couldn’t choreograph, and when an American producer has an idea in their head, nothing can shift it, not Mr Muscle, not TNT, not electric-shock treatment.

Jimmy Nederlander was convinced he knew the secret of a good musical.

‘It’s gotta have heart,’ he told me over lunch at the Côte Basque on 55th Street, with Terry, Mike and Robert. ‘I saw your show in London and I said to my wife, “Honey, this show has got fucking heart. It’s got fucking heart, we should do it.” She agreed.’

‘It’s gotta have proper choreography too,’ growled Terry.

Terry Allen Kramer liked to say that, while she wasn’t the richest woman in America, she certainly paid more tax than any woman in America. She had at one time owned majority shares in Columbia Pictures as well as having large quantities of oil money and property, including the block on which the Côte Basque, made famous by Truman Capote, stood.

When I had arrived there for the lunch appointment I had found myself almost paralysed by the snootiness of the waiters. New York is an infinitely ritzier and more class-bound city than London. White-gloved, liveried and top-lofty elevator attendants, doormen, chauffeurs and maîtres d’ can make life hell for those without social confidence. Adrift on an alien shore, all the ease I had amassed over the years that allowed me to meet a headwaiter’s eye squarely at the Ritz or Le Caprice now deserted me. Abroad is bloody, as George VI liked to say. Abroad, no matter how high you have climbed the ladders at home, forces you to slide down the snakes and start again.

‘Yessssss?’ hissed the waiter who floated up to me as I had glanced with overdone nonchalance around the dining-room, the very effort of projecting a casual proprietorial air betraying all the illness at ease and inferiority I was feeling.

‘Oh, um, well. I’m meeting some people for lunch, I’m afraid I’m a little early … should I … er … sorry.’

‘Name?’

‘Stephen Fry. Sorry.’

‘Let me see … I find no reservation under that name.’

‘Oh. Sorry! No, that’s my name, sorry.’

‘Uh! And in what name is the reservation?’

‘I think probably in the name of Kramer. Sorry. Do you have a table in the name of Terry Allen Kramer?’

It was as if the current had suddenly been switched on. A smile lit up the waiter’s whole countenance, his body language transformed itself from drooping contempt to drooling abasement, quivering attention and hysterical respect.

‘Sir, I’m sure Mrs Kramer would love for you to be seated and maybe have a glass of champagne or a cocktail? Would you like something to read while you wait? Mrs Kramer is usually ten minutes late, so perhaps some olives? An ashtray? Anything? Anything at all? Thank you, sir.’

Lordy. And indeed she had been ten minutes late, sweeping in and gathering up Jimmy Nederlander, Mike Ockrent and Robert Lindsay, who by this time had joined me on the uncomfortable anteroom sofa.

A telephone had been brought to the table and plugged into a socket by the wall for her as we sat down. Through this she had hollered instructions to minions at her office during the course of lunch.

When it came time for pudding she looked around the table. ‘Who wants dessert? You guys want dessert?’

I nodded with enthusiasm, and she loudly clapped her hands. ‘André, get the pastry cart.’

Le chariot à pâtisseries was duly wheeled before us loaded with exquisite délices. Terry Allen Kramer pointed at one more than ordinarily luxurious tower of cream, glazed pastry and crystallized fruits. ‘What’s that?’ she barked.

André went into his spiel. ‘Madame, it is a mousseline of almandine and nougatine whipped into a sabayon of praline and souffline …’ and so forth. Cutting him short, Terry positioned her hand over the pristine surface of this gorgeous creation and with one long pull dug up a great scoop of it, sucked it from her fingers with a loud smack, cocked her head to one side, thought for a moment and then said, turning her head away from the waiter as she did so, ‘Take it away, it’s shit.’

Robert and I stared with open mouths. Mike later suggested that she did this to impress us with her ruthlessness, to make us aware that we were expendable and that she took no prisoners. I simply thought it was the single most ghastly thing I had ever seen a human do, and I had once seen a man take out his cock and piss all over the desk of a four-star hotel lobby, splashing a receptionist and two bystanders.

Terry noticed that we were looking at her and smiled grimly. ‘The dessert was shit. Shit is shit. Did I say about how important the choreography is?’

If that lunch had been a test we somehow passed it, and Terry and Jimmy duly agreed to pony up.

I went back to England, and Hugh and I set about starting to write for next year’s pilot of a Fry and Laurie TV sketch show.

‘We should do a tour,’ Hugh said.

‘A tour?’

‘If we agree to a live show around the country then that will force us to write material for it. We’re not allowed to do Shakespeare Masterclass, or Dracula … only new material.’

Although we were not really well known and certainly nothing like as famous as Harry and Ben were becoming, there was a sizeable enough demand for us in college and university towns, it seemed, and a tour was arranged. We wrote and stared out of the window and paced up and down and bought Big Macs and looked out of the window and went for walks and tore at our hair and swore and watched television and bought more Big Macs and swore again and wrote and screamed with horror as the clock showed that another day was over and we looked at what we had written and groaned and agreed to meet again first thing next day whosever turn it was agreeing to arrive with some coffee and Big Macs.

After we had assembled some material I had to go back to New York for Me and My Girl rehearsals. The plan was for me to return after the opening. We would tour and record a one-off Fry and Laurie pilot show to be screened at Christmas and followed the next year by a series.


Me and My Girl rehearsed in Manhattan somewhere down near the Flatiron Building. I had never seen such facilities or met with such order in the course of a theatrical venture. There was a dance room, a song room and even a book room, a huge space dedicated to rehearsing my bits and my bits alone. I even had my own writer’s room off it, handsomely supplied with desk, electric typewriter, stationery and coffee percolator. Mike Ockrent led the same production team, but only Robert remained from the British cast. Enn Reitel had taken over from him in London, and would be followed by Gary Wilmot, Karl Howman, Brian Conley, Les Dennis and many others in the course of its long run. Here in New York Robert had Maryann Plunkett, whom I had seen in Sunday in the Park with George, playing opposite him as Sally and George S. Irving as Sir John.

I stayed at the Wyndham, an old-fashioned actor’s hotel on 58th Street whose rooms were spacious chintzy suites with bathrooms and fittings that believed it was still 1948. By each bed was a white telephone with no dial or buttons. When you picked up the receiver it connected you to the front desk. ‘I’d like to make a call,’ you would tell the operator. You gave the number you wanted and hung up. Five minutes or half an hour later, according to whim or luck, the phone would ring, and you would be through. Most nights at about two or three I would be jerked awake by the phone’s crashing buzz.

‘Yes?’

‘Your call to Rome, Italy …’

‘I didn’t ask for a call to Rome.’

‘My mistake. Wrong number. Thank you.’

At breakfast I fell into the habit of chatting with some of the long-term guests, almost all of them actors or theatre people. A favourite was Raymond Burr, enormously bulky but very kindly and cheerful, despite the habitually tired bloodhound droop of his eyes. He went so far as to ask my advice about doing more Perry Mason on television.

‘Do young people remember it?’

‘Well, I have to confess it was before my time,’ I said to him. ‘But I loved Ironside.’

‘Why thank you. They don’t want to do more Ironside, but there is talk of more Perry Mason. You never saw it?’

‘I’m sure television could do with a really good legal series. He was a lawyer, that is right?’

‘Oh my. I shall have to tell the producers. I met a smart young Englishman and he had barely heard of Perry Mason. Oh my.’

If Raymond Burr wasn’t available for conversation I had in another corner of the breakfast room Broadway’s ancient royal couple, Hume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy. They spoke to me through each other.

‘Oh look, honey, here’s the English fellow. I wonder how his rehearsals are going.’

‘Not too bad,’ I would reply. ‘The cast seem amazing to me.’

‘He says the cast is amazing! Is he confident of a hit I wonder?’

‘Oh well, you know. It’s pretty much in the lap of the gods. By which I mean the lap of the critics I suppose.’

‘He’s calling the critics gods, honey, did you hear that? Gods!’

And so on.

Once rehearsals kicked in, I saw something of the American work ethic. Competition for parts in the chorus was so tough that they never relaxed. During time off the boys and girls were teaching each other new steps, practising vocal scales and warming up or down according to the time of day. And drinking water all the time. We are now so used to it all over the western world that one has to remind oneself that there was a time when young Americans didn’t feel naked without a bottle of water in their hands.

I also saw something of the meaning of the star system. It is a kind of paradox of America, the republic that freed itself of the inequitable shackles of monarchy, class and social rank, that it chooses to privilege stars with a status far beyond that of any European duke or prince. As with any true aristocracy, the principles of noblesse oblige apply to stars. Robert told me of the time they all went upstate to film a TV commercial. It was a long and tiring day in humid summer, chorus members were clanking around in medieval armour, pearly suits and fur-lined cloaks, and take after take was called for. As the shoot wore on Robert noticed a diminution in friendliness towards him that he could not understand. He asked Maryann Plunkett whether he had done something wrong.

‘Everyone is very tired and very hot, and I think they’d like it to be over.’

‘Well, yes, me too,’ said Robert, ‘but how is that my fault?’

‘Robert, you’re the star! You’re the company leader. You decide if it’s time for everyone to wrap and go home.’

‘B-but …’ Robert, of course, had been brought up in the self-consciously ‘we’re all mates here’ cooperative atmosphere of British theatre, where no one would ever dare pull starry rank. Because we have a class system in Britain we go out of our way to make sure that it is made plain that everyone is absolutely equal. Because America doesn’t, they seem to revel in the power, status and prestige that achievement can bring.

‘Robert, it’s your duty to make decisions for us …’

Swallowing nervously, and grateful that none of his British contemporaries were witnessing the moment, he spoke up to the director in front of everyone. ‘Right, Tommy. One more take only and then everyone needs to get out of costume and be on their way.’

‘Sure, Bob,’ said the director. ‘Absolutely. Whatever you say.’

Everybody smiled, and Robert learned the duties and responsibilities of stardom.


Me and My Girl tried out in downtown Los Angeles, in the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion, then best known as the location of the annual Academy Awards ceremony. I stayed at the Biltmore Hotel off Pershing Square, almost near enough the theatre to walk. This was Los Angeles, of course, and, as everyone knows, walking is never done there. Besides, when you have rented a bright-red convertible Mustang you want to use it at every opportunity. There was really very little for me to do other than attend the early performances and occasionally offer new snatches of dialogue as required. After a week at the Biltmore, charming as it was, I thought I might as well blow all my per diems on a weekend at the Bel-Air Hotel. For the low, low price of $1,500 a night I had a little bungalow and a beautiful garden in which my own private hummingbird flitted about just for me. On the second night I invited the chorus, who somehow jammed themselves in, drank $600 worth of wine and liquor and vamoosed in a cloud of kisses and extravagant gratitude.

LA was our only try-out town, and the show had gone well enough in front of a mostly elderly subscription audience. Broadway was next, and from here there was no escape and no second chances. It is a known oddity of the New York theatre world that a production is made or broken almost solely by its review in the New York Times. It is the paper, incidentally, not the reviewer, that wields this terrible power. As Bernard Levin once observed, a Barbary Ape could hold the post of Times reviewer and still have the power to close a show. Frank Rich was the current Barbary Ape that we had to please, and there was no knowing until the night whether his thumb would go up or down. If it went down the whole production would fold, Jimmy, Terry and Richard would lose their money, and the cast would all be fired. Humiliation all round.

We had already earned a certain measure of ill will in the town by being the first show to open in the Marriott Marquis Theatre, built as part of a major Times Square reconstruction project. To make way for an enormous new hotel, the much loved Helen Hayes Theatre had been pulled down to such a howl of impassioned protest that the Marriott group promised to integrate a new theatre into the development, and the Marquis was it.

At the dress rehearsal nerves were frayed, and Jimmy Nederlander and Terry Allen Kramer, being denied, as producers, any other outlet for their tension than the pleasure of firing people, had scented blood. Their old insecurity on the issue of the dance numbers resurfaced, and, sitting behind them, I heard mutters and growls about Gillian Gregory, the choreographer. How they thought firing her the day before previews began could possibly help I do not know, but I suppose plenty of shows had been rescued in shorter time than that. I assume they liked the idea of bringing in Tommy Tune or Bob Fosse or some other legend of dance, having them work everyone eighteen hours a day for three days and then telling the world how they had fired asses and saved the show. American entertainment tycoons do like to see themselves cast in the mythological tough uncompromising sonofabitch mould. Theatre people hate dramatics – they get enough of that at work; non-theatre people dramatize everything around them.

I caught hold of Richard Armitage and mentioned that I had heard grumblings.

‘Hm,’ he said. ‘I shall have to do something about that.’

We sat and watched an energetic but somehow spiritless dress rehearsal. The new theatre smelled of carpet glue and wood varnish. It had fluorescent strips for house lights, which meant that they couldn’t be faded up or down, but only flickered on and off, killing the atmosphere. Even when they went out the exit signs were so brightly lit you could easily read your programme from their lurid spill. The doors at the back of the auditorium were horribly over-sprung such that, no matter how gently you tried to close them, they made a terrible bang, and if people didn’t know about them and let them go without care it was as if a gunshot had gone off. The dancing had been, to my untutored non-specialist eye, spectacular, but Terry Allen Kramer scribbled savagely in her notebook every time a leg kicked or a body twirled.

When finally the curtain came down for the ending she stood and opened her mouth.

‘The choreo …’

Richard’s voice drowned her out. ‘Damn. Well, those house lights are a disaster. And the doors and the exit signs. But there’s nothing we can do about that in time for the first preview. Just nothing. It would take a miracle.’

Terry uttered a harsh bark. ‘Nothing? Ha! That’s what you think! There’s plenty we can do. Bill Marriott is a personal friend. I don’t care if I have to wake him up, he’ll goddamn sort this out. Someone get me to a phone right now!’

Off she went, steaming and puffing like the iron-clad destroyer she was. Orders were issued and issues ordered, Bill Marriott was jerked from his European slumbers and in under an hour electricians were being elevated to the ceiling on scissor-lifts and men in white overalls were removing door springs at the back of the house. In her commanding glory, Terry had forgotten all about the choreography.

I shook Richard by the hand. ‘Masterly,’ I said. ‘If I had a hat, I’d take it off to you.’

By the first preview the atmosphere of the show began to be restored. The doors were now, of course, whisper quiet, the exit signs glowed gently and the house lights were warm and sweetly controllable. I had moved out of the Wyndham and was staying in a most glorious apartment on 59th Street, Central Park South, with a matchless view of the park and Fifth Avenue. It belonged to Douglas Adams, who, with typical generosity, had told me to make free of it. I held a nervous party there the evening of the first night. My parents had flown over, as had Hugh. My Great-Aunt Dita, who had escaped the Nazis in Salzburg and come over to America in the 1940s, was a formidable and terrifying presence. She offered Hugh one of her untipped Pall Mall cigarettes.

‘That’s very kind,’ said Hugh, taking out a full-strength, but filtered, Marlboro Red, ‘I prefer these.’

‘You some kind of health nut?’ said my Aunt, thrusting her pack towards him. ‘Take.’ Hugh, being the polite fellow he is, took one.



One hour before Me and My Girl’s Broadway opening. Between my cousin Danny and his grandmother, Great-Aunt Dita.

Neither Mike Ockrent nor I could face being in the auditorium with the first-night audience. The knowledge that Frank Rich had already been and written his review and that it would be out in just a few hours was almost more than we could bear. We paced up and down in the foyer, consuming gin and tonic after gin and tonic, becoming more and more hysterical with panic, terror and a sense of the absurdity of this whole venture. Our pacing routes would converge, and we kept bumping into each other, which caused us to burst into fresh fits of manic laughter.

‘We are at the first night of our own Broadway show,’ Mike kept saying, shaking his head in disbelief. ‘It can’t be true. Someone is going to wake me up.’

I repeated those lines from The Producers that everybody quotes at first nights.


Wow, this play wouldn’t run a night.

A night? Are you kidding? This play’s guaranteed to close on page four.

How could this happen? I was so careful. I picked the wrong play, the wrong director, the wrong cast. Where did I go right?


And so on.

Years later, Mike would collaborate with Mel Brooks on The Producers’ reinvention as a stage musical, only to be struck down with incurable leukaemia before he had the chance to see it open as the biggest Broadway hit of its day.

During the second half, just after the audience had gone back in from the interval, Ralph Rosen, the company’s general manager, waddled in his amiable flat-footed way across the lobby to whisper to us the news that a friend of a friend had a friend whose friend was dating a friend at the New York Times and that their friend had seen an advance copy of the Frank Rich review and that it was good. It was more than good. It was a rave. Ralph solemnly shook our hands. He was the most quiet-spoken, honourable and matter-of-fact person I had met in America. If he said a thing was so, then it was so and not otherwise.

By the time we all assembled upstairs for the party Richard had a copy in his hands and a wetness in his eyes once more.

At the Antoinette Perry Awards later that year Me and My Girl was nominated for thirteen Tonys. We failed to pick up ten of them, my category included, but Robert and Maryann each won for best performance in a musical and, perhaps most pleasingly of all, Gillian Gregory won for best choreography. I don’t know if to this day she is aware how adeptly Richard saved her from being pointlessly and unjustifiably fired.

I got back to England still shaken by my good fortune. Me and My Girl was running in the West End and on Broadway, there were productions in Tokyo, Budapest, Australia, Mexico – I have forgotten the other territories. The show would run on Broadway for the next three and a half years and in the West End for another six. In the meantime there was Fry and Laurie to look forward to, another Blackadder and … and … who knew what else? It seemed that I was an insider, a showbusiness somebody.

In August 1987 I was at home in Norfolk congratulating myself on having given up smoking for ten days. Hugh, Kim and other friends came up to help me celebrate my thirtieth birthday, and within ten minutes of their arrival I was back on the cigarettes.

My roaring twenties were over, and next month Hugh and I would start work on our BBC pilot, which we planned to call A Bit of Fry and Laurie. My bank balance was good and getting ever better. I had cars, certainty and a slowly growing name. I was the luckiest person I knew.

Never one to take stock or make inventories I do recall standing in the garden of the Norfolk house watching the sun set and feeling that I had finally arrived. I do not believe that I actually crowed over the remains of my miserable past self, but I came perhaps as close to exultation as a person can.

When someone exults, Fate’s cruel lips curl into a smile.





C

Back in London some weeks later an actor friend asked me if I fancied a line. I did not even know what he meant but I said that I certainly would like one, because he had asked in a way that made ‘a line’ sound intriguing and wicked and fun. I thought perhaps he was going to tell me a quite appalling joke or pick-up line. Instead, he took a packet of folded paper from his pocket, dug out some white powder and chopped it up into two lines on the surface of a smoked-glass coffee table. He asked me if I had a ten-pound note. I produced one, and he rolled it up tight and put it to one nostril. He sniffed up half of his line, applied the rolled-up ten-pound note to the other nostril and sniffed up the other half. I came forward, took the tube, knelt down and did the same, reproducing his actions as carefully as I could. The powder stung my nostrils enough to produce a few tears in my eyes. I went back to my chair, and we sat and talked for a while. After twenty or thirty minutes we did the same thing again. And then a third time. By now I was buzzing and garrulous and wide awake and happy.

I did not know it but this was to mark the beginning of a new act of my life. The tragedy and farce of that drama are the material for another book.

In the meantime, thank you for your company.





Experimenting with a new pair of glasses in the kitchen of my parents’ house in Norfolk.





Acknowledgements


Some of the characters who feature in this book have been kind enough to read it and correct lapses in my memory. I am especially grateful to Kim and Ben and the Nice Mr Gardhouse, but my gratitude reaches out to many others. It is very hard to know whether people will be more offended by inclusion or exclusion from these pages. Full as the book is, it would have been twice the length if I could have given space to everyone who was important in my younger life.

I thank Don Boyd for leading me to the kind and helpful Philip Wickham of the University of Exeter’s Bill Douglas Centre for the History of Cinema and Popular Culture, which houses a Don Boyd archive where invaluable Gossip material was made available to me.

To Anthony Goff, my agent, to Jo Crocker, my tireless and loving assister, to Christian Hodell and to Louise Moore at Penguin go the warmest and most affectionate and grateful thanks too, but I reserve my deepest acknowledgements for the dedicatee of this book, the colleague without whom I would never have been in a position to write it and without whose friendship my life would have been unimaginably poorer.





Illustrations


Papa.

Mama.

Grandpapa.

Sister Jo, self, brother Roger.

Between Mama and Papa with a rather long-haired Roger on the right.

Tragic hair. Tragic times. Taken some time between school and prison.

The Sugar Puffs addict has moved on to Scott’s Porage Oats. (All author’s collection)

Universally Challenged. (ITV/Rex Features)

Kim in Half Blue scarf. (From the collection of Kim Harris)

The Cherubs. I know we look like wankers, but really we weren’t. Honestly.

Kim Harris. Not unlike a young blond Richard Burton. (From the collection of Kim Harris)

Emma Thompson’s hair is starting to grow back. (Brian Logue/Daily Mail/Rex Features)

Unable to afford an outboard motor, Hugh Laurie and his poor dear friends are having to propel themselves through the water.

Playing the King in All’s Well That Ends Well, BATS May Week production 1980, in Queens’ Cloister Court. (Dr Simon Mentha)

Cableknit Pullover, Part 1. (Author’s collection)

The backlit ears of Hugh Laurie, gentleman. (Author’s collection)

Cableknit Pullover, Part 2. (Author’s collection)

Latin! The most stolen poster of the 1980 Edinburgh Fringe. (Author’s collection)

Solemn but triumphant in the Mummers group photo celebrating our Fringe First Awards. (Cambridge Mummers)

A moment later, responding to Tony Slattery and revealing an unsurprising cigarette. (Cambridge Mummers)

The Snow Queen, 1980. My first Footlights appearance. (Cambridge Footlights. Reproduced by kind permission of the Syndics of Cambridge University Library: UA FOOT 2/5/30, UA FOOT 2/8/95)

With Kim outside the Cambridge Senate House, celebrating our Tripos results. I was insanely in love with that Cerruti tie. (Andrew Everard)

In room A2, Queens’. Graduation day: posing with sister Jo. (Author’s collection)

Rowan Atkinson presents Hugh with the Perrier Prize cheque. Edinburgh, 1981. (Perrier)

The Cellar Tapes closing song. I fear we may have been guilty of embarrassing and sanctimonious ‘satire’ at this point. Hence the joyless expressions. (BBC Photo Library)

Photo call in Richmond Park for BBC version of The Cellar Tapes. (BBC Photo Library)

The same: ultimately a git with a pipe stuck in his face. (BBC Photo Library)

Performing the ‘Shakespeare Masterclass’ sketch with Hugh. (BBC Photo Library)

With Emma in ‘My Darling’ – a Robert and Elizabeth Barrett Browning sketch. (BBC Photo Library)

Hugh in Crete. We rented a villa for the purposes of writing comedy. (Author’s collection)

A cretin in a Cretan setting. (Author’s collection)

Hugh prepares to demolish me at backgammon. The retsina was satisfyingly disgusting. (Author’s collection)

Hugh, Emma, Ben, self, Siobhan and Paul: There’s Nothing to Worry About, Granada TV, 1982. Oh, but there was … (ITV/Rex Features)

I host a bed party in my room at the Midland Hotel. We seem happy. I think perhaps we were. (Photo by Robbie Coltrane)

An Alfresco sketch that a merciful providence has erased from my memory. (ITV/Rex Features)

The only time in my life I ever wore a donkey jacket. Alfresco. (Photo by Robbie Coltrane)

Providence has once again been merciful. Alfresco. (ITV/Rex Features)

Alfresco, series 2: The Pretend Pub. (ITV/Rex Features)

A twat in tweed and cravat: inexcusably slappable. Alfresco. (ITV/Rex Features)

‘We cannot be said to have been the prettiest quartet ever to greet a television audience.’ University Challenge. (BBC Photo Library)

The Young Ones. Comic heroes. (BBC Photo Library)

David Lander, earnest investigative reporter in a badly behaved blond wig. (Courtesy of Hat Trick Productions, Channel 4 and Screenocean)

The Crystal Cube, with Emma and Hugh. (Author’s collection)

The Crystal Cube. The warty look was created using Rice Krispies. True story. (Author’s collection)

The man who put the turd in Saturday Live. I cannot recall a single thing about that sketch. Why the rolled-up trouser leg? (ITV/Rex Features)

As Lord Melchett in Blackadder II. (BBC Photo Library)

More Saturday Live: with Hugh, Harry Enfield and Ben Elton. Why the electric carving knife, if that’s what it is? I remember nothing of this moment. (ITV/Rex Features)

The Tatler celibacy article. (Photo – Tim Platt/Tatler © Condé Nast Publications Ltd. Words – Stephen Fry/Tatler © Condé Nast Publications Ltd)

From Forty Years On, Chichester, 1984. Self, Doris Hare, Paul Eddington and John Fortune. (Picture courtesy of the Chichester Observer)

I remember that Paul Smith shirt. My birthday. (Author’s collection)

Emma (Ted Blackbrow/Daily Mail/Rex Features)

First-night party for the Forty Years On ‘transfer’, Queen’s Theatre, London, 1984. Katie Kelly (back to us, shiny bun), boys from the cast, self, Hugh Laurie, sister Jo.

Me and My Girl. Robert Lindsay and Emma Thompson. (Alastair Muir/Rex Features)

The French’s acting edition of Me and My Girl. (Noel Gay Organisation)

Me and My Girl. Emma’s dressing-room on the first night. (Ted Blackbrow/Daily Mail/Rex Features)

One hour before Me and My Girl’s Broadway opening. Between my cousin Danny and his grandmother, Great-Aunt Dita.

Experimenting with a new pair of glasses in the kitchen of my parents’ house in Norfolk. (Author’s collection)

Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders. The publishers will be glad to rectify in future editions any errors or omissions brought to their attention.





Index


Aaron (Biblical figure), 284

Abrahams, Harold, 147

Adams, Douglas, 121, 366–72, 383, 422

Adams, Jane, 367–8

Adelphi Theatre, London, 357

Alfresco (TV series): rehearsals, 20; SF co-writes and performs in, 231, 249, 254–5, 279, 350, 364; broadcast nationally, 238, 353; McNiven in, 243; poor ratings, 246; filming and taping, 297–8

Allen, Keith, 209, 406

alternative comedy, 205–10

And So to Ned (radio programme), 330

Andersen, Hans Christian: The Snow Queen, 168, 175–6

Anderson, Clive, 121, 205, 220

Anderson, Lindsay, 147

Anderson, Michael, 60

Andrews, Anthony, 220

Angell Sound (studio), Covent Garden, 292

Annan, Noel, Baron, 307

Arden, Annabelle, 97, 152, 155, 176

Arden, John: Serjeant Musgrave’s Dance, 162, 164

Arden, Mark, 365

Are You Being Served? (TV programme), 338

Arena (magazine), 299, 325

Armitage, Reginald (‘Noel Gay’), 259–61, 376

Armitage, Richard: signs up Emma Thompson, 175; signs up SF and Hugh Laurie, 193–4; and SF at Edinburgh, 197; and Ben Elton, 229; offers advances to SF, 234; entertains at Stebbing Park, 258–9; and SF’s writing book for Me and My Girl, 259–62, 264–6, 342, 349, 390; background, 261–2; arranges SF’s part in Forty Years On, 270, 274; sends SF to BBC, 295; and SF’s radio appearances, 331; and SF’s earnings, 359; and Elton’s writing Blackadder, 373; influence over BBC, 376; and Me and My Girl on Broadway, 409, 420–2, 424; see also Noel Gay Artists

Arnold, Matthew, 71

Ash, Leslie, 266, 298, 338, 343

Atkinson, Rowan: as Oxford man, 71, 129; performs at Edinburgh, 126, 129; on Not the Nine O’Clock News, 180, 193, 209; Armitage sends to watch and report on SF, 193–4; announces Perrier Award to The Cellar Tapes, 198–9; visits Stebbing Park, 258; Armitage signs up, 262; celebrity, 290; SF collaborates with, 298–9; motor cars, 369; and Blackadder, 372, 374, 376, 382–3, 385–7; character, 385–6; marriage to Sunetra, 387–8

Attenborough, Richard, Baron, 354

Auden, W.H., 31

Aukin, David, 266, 268–9

Australia: SF tours with revue, 203–5; SF visits for staging of Me and My Girl, 391

Ayckbourn, Alan (Sir), 191, 240

B15 (radio programme), 328

Backs to the Land (TV sitcom), 138, 193

Baddiel, David, 121

Baker, Tom, 384–5

Barber (Queens’ College undergraduate), 138–9

Barker, Ronnie, 209

Barrault, Jean-Louis, 127

Barretts of Wimpole Street, The: parodied, 190

Barton, Anne (née Righter), 85

Barton, John, 108, 190

Bates, Alan, 44, 338, 351

Bathurst, Robert, 128

Beale, Simon Russell, 90, 163, 190, 256–8

Beaton, Alistair, 333

Beckett, Samuel, 52

Belushi, John, 60, 206

Benn, Tony, 54

Bennett, Alan: as Oxford man, 71, 129; on snobbery, 105; SF admires, 270–1; at SF’s audition, 273–5; SF introduces parents to, 338; declines to join cast of Forty Years On for spaghetti meal, 344; takes over Tempest role in Forty Years On, 346–7; writes screenplay of A Private Function, 348; and Russell Harty, 351–2; Forty Years On, 271–3, 295, 325, 335–7, 342, 344–6, 350

Bennett, J.A.W., 89

Bennett-Jones, Peter, 404–5

Berger, Sarah, 44

Bergman, Martin, 128, 197, 205, 359

Berkoff, Steven: Decadence, 202–3

Berlin, Sir Isaiah, 85

Beverly Hills Cop, 203

Bird, John, 336

Birdsall, Timothy, 336

Bit of Fry and Laurie, A (TV programme), 217, 229, 424

Blackadder (TV programme), 217, 228, 237, 372–6, 381–90, 424

Blackshaw, Ben, 153–4; Have You Seen the Yellow Book? (play), 144

Blake, William, 115

Blessed, Brian, 389

Blethyn, Brenda, 332

Bloomsbury Group, 69

Blunt, Anthony, 179

Bogart, Humphrey, 57

Bond, Edward: Narrow Road to the Deep North, 134

Bostrom, Arthur, 298

Botham, Ian, 195, 203

Botham, the Musical (revue), 203–4

Botterill, Steven, 137–9

Boxer, Mark, 305–8, 318

Boyd, Don, 249–53, 306, 319

Boyd, Hilary, 306

Brahms, Caryl, 329

Bremner, Bird and Fortune (TV programme), 336

Brett, Jeremy, 115

British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC): acquires and broadcasts The Cellar Tapes, 197–8, 210, 214–20; recording methods, 218–20; Light Entertainment, 296; declines The Crystal Cube, 297–8; radio, 325–35; Richard Armitage’s influence on, 376

British Pipesmokers’ Council, 55

Broadbent, Jim, 353–4

Broadcasting House, London, 328

Broadhurst, Nicholas, 254–5

Broadsheet (student newspaper), 134, 142

Bron, Eleanor, 336

Bronowski, Jacob, 182

Brooke, Justin, 95

Brooks, Mel, 423

Brooks, Ray, 291

Broughton, Pip, 127, 135

Brown, Tina, 309

Bunce (schoolfellow), 17–18

Burns, Nica, 199

Burr, Raymond, 416–17

Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, 9–10

Bush, Kate, 355

Byrne, Patsy, 382, 384

Cagney, James, 410

Caine, (Sir) Michael, 306

Callow, Simon, 250, 353–4; Being an Actor, 353

Cambridge Mummers (drama club), 95, 124, 127, 145, 152–5, 182–3, 186, 190

Cambridge University: SF wins scholarship to (Queens’ College), 30; image, 65–6; SF attends, 65, 72–84, 89–90, 106–7, 110–13, 122, 149, 157–61; appeal to SF, 69–72; collegiate life and system, 73–6; Queens’ College, 75–8, 113, 116; admits women, 158–60; drama clubs and theatrical activities, 94–7, 106–9, 113–16, 152; Union, 101–2; Blues and Half Blues, 102–3; May Ball, 104–5, 116, 119, 122–3, 190; terms, 105–6; Head of the River competition, 110; May Week, 110–12, 188, 190, 192, 195; examination system, 122, 149–52; SF’s graduation ceremony, 195; SF leaves, 201; Mark Boxer at, 307–8; see also Footlights Club

Carlton Club, London, 378–82

Carr, Allen, 62

Cassidy, Seamus, 391

Cats (stage musical), 260, 267

Cellar Tapes, The (revue), 192, 195–9, 202, 210, 214, 218–20, 249, 280

Champix (drug; varenicline), 62

Channel 4: launched, 245

Chapman, Graham, 71, 121

Chariots of Fire (film), 145–9, 186

Charles, Prince of Wales, 201

Checkpoint (radio programme), 331

Chekhov, Anton, 257–8

Cherry, Simon, 143, 149, 152–3

Cherubs (Queens’ College club), 105, 131–2, 160–1, 195

Chichester Festival (1984), 271, 325, 335–9

Chou Lai, 405

Church, Tony, 256–7

Churchill, Sir Winston, 57

Cimino, Michael, 145

Citizen Smith (TV programme), 215

City Limits (magazine), 208, 299

Clarke, Alan, 249

Clarke, John Cooper, 114–15

Clarke, Kenneth, 101

Clary, Julian, 392

Cleese, John, 70–1, 121, 262, 271, 390

Cocteau, Jean, 7

Coe, Sebastian, Baron, 147

coffee, 20–1

Cohan, George M., 410

Collinge, Roger, 325

Colour Supplement, The (radio programme), 330, 332

Coltrane, Robbie: in Five Go Mad in Dorset, 214, 245; background and character, 230–1; plays in Alfresco, 239, 241, 298; and motor cars, 369; seduction technique, 402–3

Comedy Store see London Comedy Store

Comic Relief, 390

Comic Strip Presents … Five Go Mad in Dorset (TV show), 245

Conley, Brian, 415

Connolly, Billy, 391

Coogan, Steve, 369

Cook, Peter, 70–1, 121, 209, 271

Cook, Roger, 331–2

Cooke, Alistair, 95, 182–5

Cooper, Tommy, 207, 209, 346

Corbett, Ronnie, 209

Coren, Alan, 300, 305, 317–18

Coren, Giles, 319

Corvo, Baron (Frederick Rolfe), 26; Hadrian the Seventh (stage version), 106

Cosmo, Tony, 237

Cotton, Bill, 258, 376

Covent Garden Opera, 165

Coward, Sir Noël, 1, 57

Cranmer, Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, 70

Crocker, Jo (née Fry; SF’s sister), 134, 156

Cromwell, Oliver, 70

Cronyn, Hume, 417

Crosby, Annette, 336, 344

Cross, Ben, 147

Cryer, Barry, 210

Crystal Cube, The (proposed TV programme), 297, 409

Cundall Manor (prep school), North Yorkshire, 31–43, 105–6, 123

Curtis, Richard: as Oxford man, 71; performs with Rowan Atkinson in Edinburgh, 130; writes and performs for Not the Nine O’Clock News, 207, 209; collaborates on Blackadder, 372–5, 381, 383–4, 388–90; proposes Comic Relief, 390

Dad’s Army (TV programme), 376

Dalton, Buddy, 202

Dambusters raid (1943), 59–60

Darin, Bobby, 216

Darwin, Charles, 70

Davies, John, 143, 153

Davies, John Howard, 374

Davis, Bette, 47

Deegan, Denise: Daisy Pulls it Off (play), 346

de Jong, Nicholas, 156, 202

Delve Special (radio programme), 331–2

Dench, Dame Judi, 90

Dennis, Les, 415

Diana, Princess of Wales, 201

Dickinson, Goldsworthy Lowes, 69

Dirty Harry (film), 406

Dorchester Hotel, London, 186–8

Draughtsman’s Contract, The (film), 250

Draycott Place, Chelsea, 220

Dunhill (company), 54

Duvitski, Janine, 332

Dwyer, Penny, 190, 214

Dylan, Bob: Basement Tapes, 192

Eastwood, Clint, 270

Eddington, Paul, 272, 335, 338–9, 345–6, 351

Edinburgh Festival: SF performs at Fringe, 122, 124–7, 152, 155–6, 197

Edis, Steve, 187

Edmonds, Noel, 334

Edmondson, Ade, 45, 209, 214, 239, 246, 364–5

Edwards, Jimmy, 102

Electric Voodoo (Footlights revue), 156

Elizabeth the Queen Mother: insurance on life, 116–21

Elliott, Denholm, 348

Elms, Robert, 332

Elton, Ben: and Alfresco, 20, 238–41; Alexei Sayle’s hostility to, 206; background, 209; and new comedy, 209; co-writes and plays in The Young Ones, 210–11, 214, 245–7; co-writes There’s Nothing to Worry About, 228–9; work rate, 228, 240, 295, 297, 364, 372; Armitage disapproves of, 229; political views, 295; and Filthy Rich and Catflap, 296; as stand–up comedian, 365, 415; co-writes Blackadder, 372–6, 381, 383–4, 388–9; character and manner, 373–4, 377; friendship with SF, 377–82; hosts Saturday Live, 402

Emery, Dick, 209

Enfield, Harry, 332, 394–5, 402, 415

Equity membership, 256

Eton College, 147–8

European Theatre Group, 134–5

Evershed-Martin, Leslie, 336

Extra Dry Sherrin (radio programme), 330

Eyre, Harry, 134

Eyre, Sir Richard, 108

Face the Facts (radio programme), 331–2

Face, The (magazine), 299

Falklands War (1982), 294, 328

Farrar, Robert, 141

Farson, Daniel, 330

Fawcett, Richard, 91

Fawlty Towers (TV programme), 218, 376

Feldman, Marty, 215

Ferguson, Craig, 276

Filthy Rich and Catflap (sitcom), 296

Five Go Mad in Dorset (film), 214

Fleming, Ian: The Man With the Golden Gun, 38

Fletcher, Mandy, 382–3, 388

Foale, Michael, 131–2

Footlights Club: status, 44; May Week Review, 121; Hugh Laurie’s Presidency, 166–9, 172, 177, 186–8, 190, 192–3; qualities and performances, 172–4; performs at premiere of Chariots of Fire, 186–7; wins Perrier Award, 199, 202, 210; see also Nightcap revue

Ford, Anna, 307

Forster, E.M., 69, 71, 307

Forsyth, Bruce, 209

Fortune, John, 336, 344

Fosse, Bob, 420

Fowler, (Sir) Norman, 101

Fraser, Lady Antonia, 46–7

Frayn, Michael, 268

Freestone, Sue, 371

French, Dawn, 209, 214, 296, 332

Freud, Emma, 332–3

Friedrich, Götz, 165

Frost, (Sir) David, 52, 121, 258, 262, 329

Frost, Steve, 365

Fry, Jo (SF’s sister) see Crocker, Jo

Fry, Roger (SF’s brother), 287–8

Fry, Stephen: writing style, 2; infancy, 5–7; physical limitations, 5; addiction to sugar, 6–8, 10–11, 14–17, 19; birth, 7; schooling, 11–15, 18, 26; childhood stealing, 17, 19; dental problems, 19; expelled from Uppingham, 19, 33; gives up sugar in coffee, 20–1; corrects obesity by diet and exercise, 21–3; smoking, 23–30, 33–4, 37–40, 50, 56–8; imprisoned in young offenders institution, 27–30, 360; succumbs to temptation, 28–9; sentenced to two years’ probation, 30; wins Cambridge scholarship, 30; teaches in private school (Cundall Manor), 31–43, 105–6, 123; hair style, 34, 80; administers corporal punishment to schoolboy, 40–2; gives up smoking, 53–6, 58–9, 62–3, 424; first visits to USA, 59–60, 409–22; writer’s block overcome by smoking, 61–2; travel series on USA, 63; at Cambridge, 65, 67–9, 72–84, 89–90, 101–2, 106–7, 110–13, 122, 149, 157–61; appearance and dress, 80, 157, 380; musical taste, 82–3; examination results at Cambridge, 85–6, 122, 191–2; greed for knowledge, 87–8; on becoming an actor, 90–6; speaking confidence, 92; youthful love-making, 102; acting at Cambridge, 106–9, 113–16, 121–2, 124, 134, 152–3, 163–4, 188–9; performs at Edinburgh Festival, 122, 124–7, 152, 155–6, 197–8; asthma attacks, 123; shares college room with Kim Harris, 130–1, 157; parents accept being gay, 134; tours with European Theatre Group, 134–6; TV appearance on University Challenge, 137–40; writes first play for Mark McCrum, 141–2; writes sketches at Cambridge, 144; as film extra in Chariots of Fire, 145–8; as Kim Harris’s lover, 160; serves on college committees, 161–3; writes scripts with Hugh Laurie, 166–9, 194; affinity with Hugh Laurie, 168–71, 295; ambitions, 175; sells sketch to BBC’s Not the Nine O’Clock News, 180–1; degree (2:1), 191; graduation ceremony, 195; radio appearances, 197; wins Perrier Award for The Cellar Tapes, 199; leaves Cambridge, 201; tours Australia with revue, 203–5; on comic gift, 211–13, 246; self consciousness and insecurity, 212–14, 222–7, 276–8; on gay scene and identity, 221–2, 225–6; cyclothymia (bipolarity), 224; writes and performs for Granada TV, 227–9, 238–41, 247–9; fascination with computers and technology, 232–3, 341–2, 360–1, 363, 367–70; appears in Whitbread advertisement, 234–8; debts, 234; earnings, 236–7, 359–61, 368; exuberant behaviour, 241–2; unmusicality and inability to sing, 243–4, 397–402; driving and car ownership, 244–5, 355, 363, 407–8; rewrites film script of Gossip, 250–2; Equity membership, 256; writes book for Me and My Girl musical, 266–9, 271, 338, 342, 349, 374; plays Tempest in Alan Bennett’s Forty Years On, 271–5, 295, 325, 336, 338–9, 344–6, 350; on shared habits and comedy, 278–80; desire for celebrity, 280–9; commercial voiceovers, 291–2; contributes to Listener, 299–300, 317–18, 353; Sondheim utilizes fax machine, 300–5; reviews for Tatler magazine (as Williver Hendry), 308–18; desire to please and be liked, 311; celibacy, 320, 324–5; as workaholic, 321–2; love of radio, 325–35; takes flat in Regent Square, 340; moves to house in Southgate Road, 352; film role in The Good Father, 354; political views, 356–7; extravagance and improvidence, 360–4; buys country house in Norfolk, 362–3; buys share of Dalston house, 365; in comedy duo with Hugh Laurie, 365, 391–7, 414, 424; membership of London clubs, 377–9; part in Blackadder, 381–2, 387–9; occasional interest in women, 388; visits Australia for production of Me and My Girl, 391; treated by clinical hypnotist for musical blockage, 398–400; public image, 407–9; in New York, 409–22; takes cocaine, 425

Furber, Douglas, 268

Gabbitas and Thring (scholastic agency), 31

Gabor, Zsa Zsa, 330

Gale, John, 271, 273–4

Gambon, Michael, 353

Gardhouse, Ian, 329–30, 332, 334, 360

Garland, Patrick, 271, 273–4, 337, 339, 342

Garrick Club, London, 345

Garrick Theatre, London, 271, 273–4

Gascoigne, Bamber, 139

Gay News: reviews SF as Oscar Wilde, 144

Gay, Noel see Armitage, Reginald

Gay Related Immune Deficiency (GRID), 221

Gielgud, Sir John, 147, 272, 335

Gilbey, Mgr Alfred, 378

Globe Theatre, London, 346

Goebbels, Joseph, 57

Goldman, William, 196

Good Father, The (film), 353–5

Good Life, The (TV sitcom), 336

Goodall, Howard, 130, 259, 262

Gossip (unfinished film), 250–3, 268, 271

Granada Television, 137–8, 197–8, 210–11, 227, 231, 238–40

Grant, David, 154

Grant, Jo, 182

Gray, Dame Beryl, 46

Gray, Simon: drinking and smoking, 44–5, 50, 57; reaction to John Gordon Sinclair’s lie, 48–9; interrupts SF’s outdoor filming, 51–2; watches cricket, 52; death from cancer, 53; Cell Mates, 51–2; The Common Pursuit, 44, 46, 48–9; The Smoking Diaries, 50

Green, Richard Lancelyn, 49

Greenaway, Peter, 250

Greene, Graham: England Made Me, 325

Gregory, Gillian, 349

Groucho Club, London, 406

Gummer, John Selwyn, 101

Gutteridge, Jilly, 249–50

Hailsham, Quintin Hogg, Baron, 381–2

Hall, Sir Peter, 108

Hamilton, Lorraine, 234, 259, 265, 291

Hampton, Christopher, 353

Hanrahan, Brian, 328

Happy Families (TV drama series), 228, 364, 372

Hardy, Thomas, 137

Hare, David, 52

Hare, Doris, 336, 340, 351

Harris, Kim: at Cambridge with SF, 80–2, 99, 102–3, 130–4, 145, 148–9, 157, 164, 195; as SF’s lover, 160, 320; on Footlights committee, 172, 177; plays Dame in The Snow Queen, 175; in Footlights sketches, 180–1; shares Chelsea flat with SF, 220; and gay scene, 227; wealth and generosity, 234; with new partner, 320; celebrates SF’s 30th birthday, 424

Hart, Charles, 176

Hartell, Paul, 160

Harty, Russell, 258, 338, 351–2

Harwood, (Sir) Ronald, 52–3

Hat Trick (production company), 403–4

Have I Got News for You (TV programme), 404

Havers, Nigel, 147

Hawaii, 63

Hawthorne, Nigel, 345

Heath, (Sir) Edward, 356

Heaven’s Gate (film), 145

Hemuss (prep schoolmaster), 399–400

Henry, Lenny, 392–3

Heraclitus, 84

Hewison, Robert: Monty Python: The Case Against, 71

Higgins, Anthony, 250

Higson, Charlie, 366, 394

Hill, Benny, 207, 209

Hitler, Adolf, 57, 185

Hobson, Sir Harold, 258

Hoffman, Dustin, 351

Hoffnung, Gerard, 394

Holland, Peter, 191

Holmes, Sherlock (fictional character), 19, 27, 56–7

Hopkins, Sir Anthony, 354

Hordern, Sir Michael, 254

Horovitch, David, 344, 347, 351

Horrie, Lew, 3

Howe, Geoffrey, Baron, 101

Howman, Karl, 415

Huckstep, Nigel, 160–1

Hudson, Hugh, 147, 234, 237

Huggins, Dave, 79, 115

Hugo, Victor, 56

Hytner, Nicholas, 108

Idle, Eric, 71, 121, 177

Independent (newspaper), 55–6

Ingrams, Richard, 47

Irving, George S., 416

Izzard, Eddie, 393

Jackson, Fran, 60

Jackson, Paul, 364–5, 372, 391

Jackson, Peter, 59

Jackson, Richard, 254–5

Jacobi, (Sir) Derek, 108, 135

Jagger, (Sir) Mick, 270

James, Clifton, 359

Jandl, Ernst, 157

Jarman, Derek, 249

Jarvis, Martin, 291

Jason, (Sir) David, 217, 291, 293

Jay, Tony, 345

Jayston, Michael, 291

Jensen, David ‘Kid’, 328

Joe Allen’s (restaurant), 351

Johns, Martin, 269

Jones, Griff Rhys, 121, 180, 209, 247

Jones, Terry, 71, 129

Jongleurs, Clapham (comedy venue), 392

Jonson, Ben: Volpone, 163–4

Jorisch, Robert, 10

Joseph, Keith, Baron, 295

Joseph, Michael, 398–400

Keith, Penelope, 336

Kelly, Katie, 167–8, 172, 177, 301, 342, 353, 363, 365

Kemp-Welch, Noel, 34

Kennedy, Robert F., 184

Kenya, 109

Keynes, John Maynard, Baron, 69

Kick Up the Eighties, A (TV show), 246

Kilby, John, 219, 297

Kingdom (TV series), 63, 175

Kipling, Rudyard, 134

Kirk (school prefect), 399–400

Klaff, Jack, 332

Knight, L.C., 164

Knox, Mark, 136

Kramer, Larry: Faggots, 221

Kramer, Terry Allen, 411–14, 520–2

Lambert, Anne Louise, 250

Lamont, Norman, Baron, 101

Lane, Lupino, 265, 269

Langan, Peter, 306–7

Langham, Chris, 211

Larmour, Brigid, 97, 152, 188–90

Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson, The (US TV programme), 276

Late Night Sherrin (radio programme), 329–30

Latimer, Hugh, Bishop of Worcester, 60

Latin! or Tobacco and Boys (play by ‘Sue Denim’, i.e. SF), 24, 143, 149, 152–5, 172, 249, 254–5, 258

Laurie, Hugh: in Alfresco, 20; appearance, 71; in Nightcap revue, 128, 167; meets SF in Edinburgh, 156; as President of Footlights, 166–7, 172, 177, 186–8, 190, 192–3; SF writes scripts with, 166–70, 181, 193; affinity with SF, 168–71, 179, 195; produces The Snow Queen pantomime, 168, 176; rowing, 171, 178; ambitions, 175; appetite, 178; musical abilities, 179, 248; in Memoirs of a Fox revue, 181; plays in Love’s Labour’s Lost, 188–9, 282; degree, 192; accepts Richard Armitage’s offer for professional career, 194; displeasure at Oxford Playhouse Theatre, 195–6; wins Perrier Award for The Cellar Tapes, 199; background, 208; writes and performs for Granada TV, 210, 227–31, 239–41, 247–9; natural gifts, 213, 247–8; and televising of The Cellar Tapes, 214; Ben Elton writes for, 228; Equity membership, 256; visits Richard Armitage, 258; with Noel Gay Artists, 262; commercial voiceovers, 291–4; and The Crystal Cube (TV programme), 297; SF shares Dalston house with, 301; moderates work rate, 321; told of SF’s Macintosh computer, 341; house in Kentish Town, 342; shares house in Southgate Road, 353, 363; in Kate Bush video, 355; in Happy Families, 364; buys share of Dalston house, 365; in comedy duo with SF, 365, 391–7, 402, 409, 414, 424; appears in Blackadder, 385; smoking, 422

Law, Phyllida, 344, 351

Lawrence, D.H.: Women in Love, 137

Leavis, F.R., 46–7, 49

Leavis, Queenie, 46

Leicester: Me and My Girl opens in, 346, 348

Leigh, Mike: Abigail’s Party, 268

Le Keux, John: Memorials of Cambridge, 75

Lennox, Annie, 101

le Prevost, Nicholas, 211

Lerner, Alan Jay: The Street Where I Live, 268

Lester, Mark (lawyer), 138–9

Lever, Harold, Baron, 102

Levin, Bernard, 102, 419

Lewis, Clive Staples, 89, 92

Lewis, David, 153

Lewis-Smith, Victor, 332

Lindsay, Robert: in Citizen Smith, 215; takes lead in revival of Me and My Girls, 266, 338, 348; in Hamlet, 343; in US production of Me and My Girl, 409, 412–15, 418–19; and Terry Allen Kramer’s behaviour, 414; wins award for Me and My Girl, 424

Linley, David Armstrong-Jones, Viscount, 338, 357–8

Listener (magazine), 299–300, 305, 317–18, 353

Live and Let Die (film), 359

Livingston, Ken, 333

Lloyd, John, 18, 207, 209, 372, 374, 383, 388–9

Lloyd-Webber, Andrew, Baron, 176

Lochhead, Liz, 211

Logan, Nick, 299

Lohan, Lindsay, 60–1

London: 1980s life, 294; gentlemen’s clubs, 377–9

London Comedy Store, 208, 364, 394

Loose Ends (radio programme), 332–3

Los Angeles, 419

Luke, Peter, 106

Lyndhurst, Nicholas, 217

Lynn, Jonathan, 345

Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, 254

McBurney, Simon, 128, 152, 156

McCartney, Sir Paul, 401–2

McCrum, Mark, 141–3, 153–4

McCrum, Michael, 141

McCrum, Robert, 141

McGrath, Rory, 403–4

McInnerny, Tim, 237, 382, 384

Macintosh, Tony, 406

McKellen, Sir Ian, 81, 90, 108, 191, 193

McKenna, Paul, 62

MacKenney, Richard, 113–15

McNiven, Dave, 243

Madagascar, 21

Magnum Force (film), 363

Man With the Golden Gun, The (film), 359

Manchester, 227, 238

Mankowitz, Wolf: The Bespoke Overcoat, 106

Margolyes, Miriam, 354, 385

Marlowe, Christopher, 24

Marlowe, Linda, 202

Marowitz, Charles: Artaud at Rodez, 124, 127, 135

Marriott, Bill, 421

Martini Foundation, 252–3

Mason, James, 108, 184

Massey, Anna, 115–16

Massy, Baron de, 311

Mather, Victoria, 332–3

Matthew, Brian, 197

Maugham, Somerset: Home and Beauty, 93

May, Elaine, 240

Mayall, Rik: and Simon Gray, 44–5, 49; and new comedy, 209, 239; collaborates with Elton on The Young Ones, 210, 246; comic qualities, 213–14, 246, 387; and Ade Edmondson, 365; in Blackadder, 385–7

Mayer, Lise, 210, 214, 246

Mayhew-Archer, Paul, 331–2

Me and My Girl (stage musical): revival, 260–9, 271, 300, 325, 338, 340, 342, 374; opening in Leicester, 346, 348–9; transfers to West End, 353, 357–9; staged in Australia, 390–1; produced in New York, 409–12, 415–16, 419–22; in Los Angeles, 419; international success, 424; nominated for Tony awards, 424

Meades, Jonathan, 319–20, 324

Melbourne Arts Centre, 391

Memoirs of a Fox (revue), 176, 181

Meyer, Russ, 6

Middleditch, Penny (SF’s cousin), 117

Middleton, Thomas and Thomas Dekker: The Roaring Girl, 152–3, 155

Miller, Jonathan, 71, 121

Milligan, Spike, 215

Mitchell, Bill, 291

Mitchell, David, 121

Mitchell, Warren, 402

Moab is My Washpot (SF; memoir), 1–2, 17

Moir, Jim, 296–7, 409

Molina, Alfred, 211

Montagu, Felicity, 332

Monty Python (TV series), 209, 239

Mooney, Paul, 44, 49

Moore, Dudley, 71, 129

Moore, G.E., 69, 335

Moore, Oscar, 152

Morecambe, Eric, 54, 207, 209; death, 346

Morrison, Steve, 229, 240–1

Morrissey (i.e. Steven Patrick Morrissey), 324

Mulville, Jimmy, 403–4

Nation, Terry, 218

Neatnews (radio programme), 328–9

Nederlander, James, 411–14, 420

Neil, Mr (grocer), 10–11

Nelson, Admral Horatio, 1st Viscount, 26

Neumann, Martin (SF’s grandfather), 9–10, 28

New Statesman, The (play), 254

New York, 409–16, 420–2

New York Times, 419, 423

Newell, Mike, 353

Newman, Rob, 121

Newsbeat (radio programme), 328

Newton, Sir Isaac, 70

Nichols, Mike, 240

Nightcap (Cambridge Footlights revue), 127–9

Noel Gay Artists (agency), 175, 235–6, 261–2, 291

Noel Gay Music (agency), 359

Norfolk College of Arts and Technology (NORCAT), King’s Lynn, 26, 92

Norton, Graham, 332

Not the Nine O’Clock News (TV programme), 180–1, 193, 207, 209, 239, 383

Nunn, Trevor, 108, 135

Ockrent, Mike: directs Me and My Girl revival, 266–7, 269–70, 338, 340, 349; background, 269; and Stephen Sondheim’s exploitation of SF’s fax machine, 300–1; and Me and My Girl in Australia, 391; and Terry Allen Kramer, 414; in New York with Me and My Girl, 422–3

Oldman, Gary, 150

Olivier, Sir Laurence (later Baron), 93–4, 336, 351–2

Only Fools and Horses (TV programme), 215

Orme, Stuart, 228

Ornstein, Dita (SF’s great-aunt), 422

Orton, Joe: Loot, 346

Oulton, Caroline, 141–3, 152, 388

Oxford, 70–1, 129; see also Playhouse Theatre

Oxford and Cambridge Club, London, 377–8

Oxford Theatre Group, 197

Palin, Michael, 71, 129, 348

Palmer, James, 171

Paltrow, Gwyneth, 324

Parker, Alan, 234

Parkinson, Cecil, Baron, 101

Parkinson, Sir Michael, 138

Pascal, Blaise, 226

Paston School, North Walsham, Norfolk, 26

Paxman, Jeremy, 139

Perrier Award (Edinburgh Festival), 20, 199, 202, 210

Perry Mason (US TV series), 416–17

Philips (schoolboy), 40–2

Pinter, Harold: friendship with Simon Gray, 46–7; watches cricket, 52; social awkwardness, 53; smoking, 57; David Aukin produces, 268

Playhouse Theatre, Oxford, 195

Plowman, Jon, 210–11, 213

Plunkett, Maryann, 416, 418, 424

Poliakoff, Stephen: City Sugar, 134

Pols, Bob, 92

Pope-Hennessy, James, 49

Popplewell, Oliver, 32

Posner, Geoff, 396

Potter, Dennis, 268; The Singing Detective, 353

Powell, Enoch, 102

Praed, Michael, 258

Prince, Hal, 300

Prince, Peter, 353

Pringle, Derek, 146

Private Function, A (film), 348

Producers, The (Mel Brooks and Thomas Meehan; play and stage musical), 423

Pucklechurch, Gloucestershire, 27, 30, 360

Puttnam, Sir David (later Baron), 147–8, 234, 298

QI (TV programme): publicity, 55; taping, 63

Queen’s Head (bar), Chelsea, 221

Queen’s Theatre, London, 340, 344, 346

Quiller-Couch, Sir Arthur, 318

Quinton, Anthony, Baron, 335

Rand, Ayn: Atlas Shrugged, 303–4

Rashbrook, Stephen, 336

Rattigan, Sir Terence, 337

Ravens, Jan, 144, 191

Reagan, Ronald, 188, 201

Redgrave, Sir Michael, 95, 108, 183

Redmond, Siobhan, 211, 239, 241

Reeves, Vic, 296

Regent Square, Bloomsbury, 340

Reitel, Enn, 291, 415

Rice, Matthew, 337–8, 357

Rice, Peter, 337

Rich, Frank, 419, 422–3

Richard, Sir Cliff, 324

Richardson, Charles, 394

Richardson, Christopher, 130, 196

Richardson, Miranda, 382, 384

Richardson, Peter, 214

Ridley, Nicholas, Bishop of London, 70

Rising Damp (TV sitcom), 207

Roberts, Michael, 308, 310

Robinson, Robert, 139

Robinson, Tony, 382, 384

Rolfe, Frederick see Corvo, Baron

Rose, Arthur, 268

Rosen, Ralph, 423

Rosengard, Peter, 208

Ross, Jonathan, 6

Ross, Sandy, 210–11, 213, 229, 241

Rossiter, Leonard, 346

Rumney, Peter, 122, 126

Russell, Bertrand, 69, 185, 335

Rylands, George (‘Dadie’), 95

Sachs, Andrew, 332

Sahlins, Bernie, 240–1

Sahlins, Marshall, 240

St Mark’s Rise, Dalston, 365

Sands, Bobby, 201

Sarchet, Tony, 331

Sassoon, Siegfried, 176

Sastry, Sunetra (Mrs Rowan Atkinson), 387–8

Saturday Live (TV programme), 391, 394–7, 402, 409

Saturday Night Live (TV programme), 240

Saunders, Jennifer, 209, 214, 296, 364

Savident, John, 297

Sax, Geoffrey, 254

Sayle, Alexei, 205–7, 209, 239

Sayle, Linda, 206

Scargill, Arthur, 201

Schlesinger, John, 401

Schlesinger, Paul, 189

Scofield, Paul, 164

Scotsman, The (newspaper), 127, 155–6

Scott, Ridley, 234

Scott, Tony, 234

Scott’s Porage Oats, 19

Sessions, John, 44, 46, 49, 252

Sewell, Brian, 319, 332

sex: and smoking, 24–5

Shakespeare, William, 85–6, 94; All’s Well That Ends Well, 149; Love’s Labour’s Lost, 188–9, 282; Macbeth, 135–6; The Tempest, 113–16, 136, 160

Shand, Neil, 333

Shaw, George Bernard, 57

Shearer, Paul: in Alfresco, 20; in Footlights revue, 172, 190, 192; Armitage signs up, 194, 262; and Elton’s The Young Ones, 210; and televising of The Cellar Tapes, 214; leaves There’s Nothing to Worry About, 229; in The Crystal Cube, 297

Shepherd, Peter, 306

Sherlock Holmes Society of London, 19

Sherriff, R.C., 60

Sherrin, Ned, 329–30, 333–4

Short Circuit (film), 88

Short, Nigel, 81

Simpkin, Paul, 176

Sinclair, John Gordon, 44, 48–9

Skeat, W.W., 89

Slattery, Tony, 155, 190, 213–14, 259, 262, 332

Smith, Arthur, 332

Smith, Dame Maggie, 348

Smith, Mel, 180, 209, 247, 296

Smith, Sir Paul, 293

smoking: SF’s addiction to, 23–30, 33–4, 37–40, 50, 56–8; and sex, 24–5; Simon Gray’s addiction to, 44–5, 50, 57; SF gives up, 53–6, 58–9, 62–3, 424

Snow, Greg, 176

Softley, Ian, 113–15, 136

Sondheim, Stephen, 300–5

Sophocles: Oedipus Rex, 121–2, 124, 126–7

Southgate Road, London, 352, 354, 363

Speak, Peter, 82–3

Spearing, A.C., 78

Speight, Johnny, 402

Spenser, Edmund, 106

Spitting Image (TV programme), 383, 394

Stamp, Gavin, 319

Stebbing Park, Essex, 258, 296

Stevenson, Pamela, 391

Stewart, Patrick, 93

Stiller, Jerry, 61

Sting (born Gordon Sumner), 324

Stoker, Bram: Dracula, 190, 205

Stone, Adam, 176

Stoppard, Sir Tom, 52–3, 57, 64; Travesties, 97, 152

Stormbreaker (film), 255

Stouts Hill (school), 11, 13

Strachey, Lytton, 69

Sturridge, Mary-Lou, 406

Suchet, David, 191

sugar beet, 10

Sugar Puffs (cereal), 6–8, 10–11, 19

Sullivan, John, 215

sweets and chocolate, 12–17, 19–20

Swinnerton-Dyer, Sir Peter, 157

Swinton, Tilda, 181–2, 259

Sykes, Eric, 215

Symons, Nick, 342, 353, 363, 365

Tafler, Jonathan, 127, 135–6

Tandy, Jessica, 417

Tatler (magazine), 299, 306, 308–10, 318–20, 324

Taylor, Barry, 114, 136, 149–52

Temple, John G., 241–2

Temple, Julian, 250

Tennant, David, 90

Terrence Higgins Trust, 393

That Was The Week That Was (TV programme), 329

Thatcher, Carol, 332–3

Thatcher, Margaret, Baroness, 83, 201, 208, 294–5, 328, 333, 380

There’s Nothing to Worry About (TV sketch show), 20, 228–9, 238, 280, 373

This Is David Harper (earlier This Is David Lander; TV programme), 332, 356, 404

Thompson, Emma: at Cambridge, 20, 98–101, 128, 143–4, 149, 152, 166, 172, 190, 192; sees Latin in Edinburgh, 156; Armitage signs up, 175, 262; in Memoirs of a Fox revue, 181; background, 208; writes for Granada show, 210; natural gifts, 213; and televising of The Cellar Tapes, 214; performs in Ben Elton sketches, 228, 239; visits Richard Armitage, 258; in The Crystal Cube (TV programme), 297; moderates work commitments, 321; plays in Me and My Girl, 343, 348

Thompson, Eric, 98

Thornton, Frank, 338, 348

Time Out (magazine), 208, 299

Tinguely, Jean, 152

Toksvig, Sandi, 144

Tolkien, J.R.R., 92

Tolkin, Michael and Stephen, 250–2

Trueman, Brian, 138

Trueman, Fred, 54

Truss, Lynn, 299

Tune, Tommy, 420

Twisk, Russell, 299, 319

Two Ronnies (Ronnie Barker and Ronnie Corbett), 209

United Artists (film corporation), 145

United States of America: SF visits, 59–60, 409–19; SF makes TV travel series on, 63

University Challenge (TV show), 137; parodied, 246–7

Uppingham School, 18–19, 33, 91, 130, 196

Ustinov, Sir Peter, 270

Valentine, Jeremy, 32

Varney, Reg, 336

Wade, Joanna, 154

Wagner, Richard, 82; Ring Cycle, 165

Walker, Mike, 349

Walter, Harriet, 353

Ward, Don, 208

Waugh, Evelyn, 31, 129

Webb, Robert, 121

Webber, Andrew Lloyd, Baron, 160, 258

Webber Douglas Academy, 193

Weiland, Paul, 234–7

Welland, Colin, 145, 352

Welles, Orson, 238

Whalley, Joanne, 353

Whim (burger bar), Cambridge, 177–8

Whitbread (brewers), 234–8

Whitehouse, Paul, 366, 394, 402

Who Dares Wins (TV programme), 403–4

Who Do You Think You Are? (TV programme), 9

Wilde, Oscar: SF imitates, 27; smoking, 56–7; as Oxford man, 71, 129; SF plays in Have You Seen the Yellow Book?, 144; The Picture of Dorian Gray, 56

Williams, Charles: Thomas Cranmer of Canterbury (verse play), 92

Wilmot, Gary, 415

Wilson, Dennis Main, 215–17, 219

Wilson, Harold, Baron, 54

Wilson, Jack, 171

Wilson, Ross, 51

Wise, Ernie, 207, 209

Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 69

Wodehouse, P.G., 47, 57

Wogan, Sir Terry, 334

Woman’s Hour (stage show), 143–4

Wood, John, 93

Woolf, Virginia, 71

Wordsworth, William, 5, 110

Wyke, Rob, 113, 160

Yarwood, Mike, 209

Yeats, W.B.: translation of Oedipus Rex, 127

Yes, Minister (TV programme), 336, 345

Young Ones, The (TV comedy series), 210, 214, 245–7, 364, 383–4

Young Winston (film), 354

Zanzibar club, London, 402–6

Zyban (drug; amfebutamone), 58–3





Table of Contents

Introduction

C is for C12H22O11 for Cereal, for Candy, for Caries, for Cavities, for Carbohydrates, for Calories

C is for Cigarettes for Convict, for Cundall, for Corporal Punishment, for Common Pursuit, for Cessa

1. College to Colleague

Cambridge

College and Class

Chess, Classics, Classical Composers, Curiosity and Cheating

Caledonia 1

Cherubs, Coming Out, Continent

Challenge 1

Corpus Christening

Chariots 1

Caledonia 2

Conveniences

Committees

Cycle

Comedy Colleague, Collaborator and Comrade

Continuity and Clubroom

Comedy Credits

Cooke

Chariots 2

Corpsing Chorus

Cellar Tapes and Celebration

Cheerio, Cambridge

Caledonia 3

2. Comedy

Carry on Capering

Clash of Cultures

Chelsea, Coleherne Clones and Conscience

Colonel and Coltrane

Computer 1

Commercial

Create!

Car

Challenge 2

Cinema

Church and Chekhov

Cockney Capers

Chichester 1

Crises of Confidence

Celebrity

Commercials, Covent Garden, Compact Discs, Cappuccinos and Croissants

Crystal Cube

Columnist

Cryptic in Connecticut

Contortionist

Critics and Couriers

Confirmed Celibate

Characters and the Corporation

Colonel and Mrs Chichester




Unknown





Unknown




'foe)}cjotis)j v|cicedf N& vomc T/rnes

Ted Wallace is an old, sour, womanising, cantankerous,

whisky-sodden beast of a failed poet and drama critic, but

he has his faults too.

Fired from his newspaper, months behind on his alimony

payments and disgusted with a world that undervalues him,

Ted seeks a few months' repose and free drink at Swafford

Hall, the country mansion of his old friend Lord Logan.

But strange things have been going on at Swafford.

Miracles. Healings. Phenomena beyond the comprehension

of a mud-caked hippopotamus like Ted...

'My goodness what fruity language Fry uses!

You can feel his enjoyment, and also the huge force

of his desire to please you, as you read this'

William Leith, Mail on Sunday

'One of the funniest people writing on either side

of the Atlantic... like a combination of Evelyn Waugh

and Kingsley Amis but funnier than either'

Publishers Weekly

ISBN 0-09-945703-2

"'III

ilium

9 "780099

The Hippopotamus

A wonderful heart and botty warmer of a book' Sunday Express

The jokes are all bang on' Lynne Truss, The Times

This novel is clever, as we have come to expect from Stephen Fry, and witty, as we have come to expect from Stephen Fry What is not so expected is that it looks like Fry's Brideshead. There seems to be a pattern in the carpet, there seems to be a theme of spiritual redemption and the operation of grace. But the carpet, being Fry's, has a twist in it and the pattern is not what it seems' Lynn Barber, Sunday Times

The literary godchild of British comic novelist Kingsley Amis . . . Perfectly funny' USA Today

'[The novel's] virtues are cynicism and ill will, directed energetically at all that is trendy and modern, and embod­ied in the blubbery, whiskified carcass of an out-of-date poet named Ted Wallace . . . He rages entertainingly at a glorious array of targets' Time Magazine

Tootingly and tremendously funny' Christopher Buckley

'One of the funniest people writing on either side of the Atlantic . . . Achingly funny . . . Like a combination of Evelyn Waugh and Kingsley Amis but, because Fry is such a dazzling mimic and has a splendid ear for contem­porary jargon, funnier than either' Publishers Weekly

About the author

Stephen Fry was born in the twentieth century and will die in the twenty-first. In the course of writing seven books he has drunk four hundred and twelve thousand cups of coffee, smoked one and a half million cigarettes and worn out nineteen pairs of trousers. He has no birth sign.

Abo by Stephen Fry

FICTION

The Liar

Making History

The Stars' Tennis Balls

NON-FICTION

Paperweight

Moab Is My Washpot

Rescuing the Spectacled Bear

with Hugh Laurie

A Bit of Fry and Laurie

A Bit More Fry and Laurie

Three Bits of Fry and Laurie

The Hippopotamus

Stephen Fry

Reissued by Arrow in 2004

13579 10 8642

Copyright © Stephen Fry 1994

The right of Stephen Fry to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988

This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by

way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or

otherwise circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any

form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published

and without a similar condition including this condition being

imposed on the subsequent purchaser

First published in the United Kingdom by Hutchinson in 1994 First published in paperback by Arrow Books in the United Kingdom in 1995

Arrow Books

The Random House Group Limited

20 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SWIV 2SA

Random House Australia (Pty) Limited

20 Alfred Street, Milsons Point, Sydney,

New South Wales 2061, Australia

Random House New Zealand Limited 18 Poland Road, Glenfield, Auckland 10, New Zealand

Random House (Pty) Limited Endulini, 5a Jubilee Road, Parktown 2193, South Africa

The lines quoted on page 44, 48, and 49 are from 'A Father's Advice' by Mark Beaufoy

The lines of verse from 'The Hippopotamus' by T.S. Eliot are

taken from The Complete Poems and Plays by T.S. Eliot,

reproduced here by kind permission of Faber and Faber Limited

and the Estate of T.S. Eliot

The Random House Group Limited Reg. No. 954009

www.randomhouse.co.uk

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Papers used by Random House are natural, recyclable products made

from wood grown in sustainable forests. The manufacturing processes

conform to die environmental regulations of die country of origin.

ISBN 0 09 945703 2

Typeset by Palimpsest Book Production Limited, Polmont, Stirlingshire

Printed and bound in Great Britain by Cox & Wyman Ltd, Reading, Berkshire

For Kim, alter ipse amicus

The author would like to thank Matthew Rice for his invaluable help with the shooting scenes. Any inaccuracies in that quarter are entirely his fault.

The broad-backed hippopotamus Rests on his belly in the mud; Although he seems so firm to us He is merely flesh and blood.

The Hippopotamus', T. S. Eliot

Foreword

You can't expect an arse like me to tell a story compe­tently. It's all I can bloody do to work this foul machine. I've counted up the words processed, a thing I do every hour, and, if technology can be trusted, it looks as if you're in for 94,536 of them. Good luck to you. You asked for it, you paid me for it, you've got to sit through it. As the man said, I've suffered for my art, now it's your turn.

I don't claim that it has been a wholly grotesque expe­rience. The Project, as you insist on calling it, has kept me from drinking at lunch-time, from drooling after unattainable women and from quarrelling with the unspeakables next door. At your suggestion, I have been leading a more or less regular life these seven months and I am told the benefits can be read clearly in complex­ion, waistline and eye-whites.

The routine has been fixed and perversely pleasurable. Every morning I have risen at round about the hour most decent people are thinking of one more shot before bed, I have showered, descended the stairs with a light tread, champed through a bowl of Bran Buds and guided my unwilling slippers studywards. I switch on the computer - a procedure my son Roman calls 'jacking into the

xi

matrix' - goggle with disgusted eyes at whatever guff I've set down the night before, listen to some more of those bloody interview tapes with Logan, light up a Rothman and just bloody well get down to it. If the day has gone well I'll disappear upstairs for a round of light celebratory masturbation - what Roman would no doubt call 'jacking into the mattress' - and I won't so much as think of a bottle till seven-ish. All in all a proud and pure life.

The problem with renting a house in the country is that suddenly everyone wants to know you. I am endlessly having to fend off Oliver, Patricia and Rebecca and others who seem to think my time is limitless and my cellar bottomless. Every once in a while the Bitch will unload a son or daughter for the weekend, but they are both big enough and ugly enough to look after them­selves and don't need me to help them roll their joints or fit their coils. Next week Leonora will be moving into the house I've given her and be permanently off my hands. She's far too old to be clinging to me.

No, on balance I would say the thing's been a huge success. As a process, that is, as a process. Whether the product has anything to recommend it is, naturally for you to say.

I am fully aware that there's a deal of tarting up to be done. I assume you'll make some decision about whether or not to create a unified point of view ... a consistent third-person narrative, an omniscient author, an innocent eye or an innocent I, all that Eng. Lit. balls. Since half of

xn

it's in letter form you could always titivate here, dandify there and call it an Epistolary Novel, couldn't you?

My favourite candidate for a title is Other People's Poetry, I have a feeling however that your filthy market­ing people will regard this as a notch too poncey. It seems to^ me to be the best title, the only title. So whatever cheap alternative you dream up instead, to me this book will always be Other People's Poetry and nothing else. Your suggestion, What Next? or Now What? or whatever it was, strikes me as a touch too Joseph Heller and a whole smashing upper-cut too market-led, as I believe the phrase is. Otherwise I'm rather fond of The Thaumaturge; that would go down as my nap for place. No doubt you'll come up with your own clever-arse idea. Roman thinks Whisky and Soda would be rather neat.

The details here below are more or less accurate. If you develop a publisher's yellow streak, you can always change the names and dates - buggered if I care. Meanwhile, on delivery of this, the second quarter of my advance is due: I'm off back to the smoke to find myself a tart and a bar, so sling the cheque over to the Harpo, in which place too a message can be left, delivering itself of your professional opinion, for what little it's worth.

E.L.W.

xiii

1

The fact is I had just been sacked from my paper, some frantic piffle about shouting insults from the stalls at a first night.

Theatre criticism should be judgement recollected in tranquillity/ my wet turd of an editor had shrilled, still trembling from the waves of squeal and whinge that actors, directors, producers and (wouldn't you just believe it) pompous, cowardly prigs of fellow-reviewers had unleashed upon him by fax and phone throughout the morning. 'You know I support my staff, Ted. You know I venerate your work/

'I know no such bloody thing. I know that you have been told by people cleverer than you that I am a feather in your greasy cap/

I also knew that he was the kind of anile little runt who, in foyers and theatre bars the West End over, can be heard bleating into their gin and tonics, 'I go to the theatre to be entertained/ I told him so and a full gill more.

A month's salary, deep regret, the telephone number of some foul rehab clinic and my lance was free.

If you're a half-way decent human being you've prob­ably been sacked from something in your time ... school,





Unknown





1


Stephen Fry

seat on the board, sports team, honorary committee membership, club, satanic abuse group, political party . . . something. You'll know that feeling of elation that surges up inside you as you flounce from the headmaster's study, clear your locker or sweep the pen-tidies from your desk. No use denying the fact, we all feel under­valued: to be told officially that we are off the case confirms our sense of not being fully appreciated by an insensitive world. This, in a curious fashion, increases what psychotherapists and assorted tripe-hounds of the media call our self-esteem, because it proves that we were right all along. It's a rare experience in this world to be proved right on anything and it does wonders for the amour propre, even when, paradoxically, what we are proved right about is our suspicion that everyone consid­ers us a waste of skin in the first place.

I boarded the boat that plies its fatuous course bet­ween newspaperland and real London and watched the Sunday Shite building grow upwards in space as slow knots were put between self and dismal docklands and, far from feeling mopey or put upon, I was aware of a great swelling relief and a pumping end-of-term larkiness.

At such times, and such times only, a daughter can be a blessing. Leonora would by now have high-heeled her way, it being half past twelve, to the Harpo Club. You probably know the place I mean - can't use the real name, lawyers being lawyers - revolving doors, big bar, comfy chairs, restaurants, more or less acceptable art on the walls. By day, smart publishers and what used to be





Unknown





2


The Hippopotamus

called the Mediahedin; by night, the last gasp of yester­day's Soho bohemians and washed-up drunks taking comfort from the privilege of being sucked up to by the first gasp of tomorrow's ration.

In the back brasserie Leonora (hardly my idea, a name that tells you all you need to know about the child's footling mother) hugged, snogged and squealed.

'Daddeel What brings you here in the daytime?'

If you take that slithery tongue out of my ear, I'll tell you.'

She probably imagined that a slightly famous daugh­ter and her even more slightly famous father displaying easy affection for one another in such a manner would provoke envy and admiration in those of her tight-arsedly bourgeois generation who only ever saw their parents for tea in hotels and wouldn't think of swearing, smoking and drinking with them in public. Typical bloody Leonora; there are pubs all over the country where three gener­ations of ordinary families drink and swear and smoke at each other every bloody night, without it ever cross­ing their minds that they are simply sensationally lucky to have such a just brilliantly fabulous relationship with their wonderful daddies.

I dropped the Rothmans and lighter on the table and let the banquette blow off like a Roman emperor as it took my weight. The usual dirt averted their eyes while I took in the room. Couple of actors, nameless knot of advertis­ers, that queen who presents architecture programmes on Channel Four, two raddled old messes I took to be rock





Unknown





3


Stephen Fry

stars, and four women at a table, one of whom was a publisher and all of whom I wanted to take upstairs and spear more or less fiercely with my cock.

Leonora, whom I had never wanted to spear, the gods be thanked in these unforgiving times, was looking thin­ner and more lustrous-eyed than ever. If I didn't know it was unfashionable I would have supposed her to be on drugs of some kind.

'What's all this?' I asked, picking up a portable tape-recorder on the table in front of her.

'I'm profiling Michael Lake at one,' she said. Tor Town &d Around!

That fraud? His dribble of three-act loose-stooled effluent is the reason I'm here.'

'What can you mean?'

I explained.

'Oh Daddy,' she moaned, 'you are the limit! I saw a preview on Monday. I think it's a perfectly brilliant play.'

'Of course you do. And that's why you are a worth­less key-basher who fills in time sicking out drivel for snob glossies until a rich, semi-aristocratic queer comes to claim you for a brood-mare, while I, for all my faults, remain a writer.'

'Well, you're not a writer now, are you?'

'A jessed eagle is still an eagle/ I declared, with massive dignity.

'So what are you going to do? Wait for offers?'

'I don't know, my old love, but I do know this. I need





Unknown





4


The Hippopotamus

your mother off my back until Fm sorted out. Fm two months behind as it is.'

Lenora promised to do what she could and I ske­daddled from the brasserie in case the Lake fake was early. Playwrights more than most are not above throw­ing good wine or bad fists when the valueless offal they have vomited up before a credulous public has been exposed for what it is.

I sat at the bar and kept an eye on the mirror dead ahead, which gave a full view of the influx from the entrance door behind me.

The lunch crowd twittered around the bar area await­ing their meal-tickets or their spongers; the daytime scent of the women and the sunlight pouring through the window created an interior atmosphere so distinct from the dark, flitting nimbus that hangs over the place at night that we might have been lapping in a different room in a different decade. In America, where boozers are often under the street, like the cutesy bar in that ghastly television series they repeat every day on Channel Four, a daytime atmosphere is positively banished. The punter, I suppose, is not to be reminded that there is a working world going on outside, lest he start to feel guilty about pissing it away. Like an increasing number of niminy-piminy Europeans, Americans bracket drink­ing with gambling and whoring, as deeds to be done in the dark. For myself, I have no shame and don't have to steal off to Tuscany or the Caribbean to be able to drink guiltlessly in the sunlight. This casts me as a freak





Unknown





5


Stephen Fry

in a lunch-time world where the fires of anything vinous are extinguished by spritzing sprays of mineral water and the blaze of anything hearty is drizzled in balsamic vine­gar or damped down with blanketing weeds of radiccio, lollo rosso and rocket. Christ, we live in arse-paralysingly drear times.

Once, since we're on the subject of designer lettuce, at a luncheon for literary hacks, the novelist Weston Payne prepared a salad of dock, sycamore and other assorted foliage collected from the residents' garden in Gordon Square. He dressed these leaves in a vinaigrette and to universal applause served them up as cimabue, putana vera and lampedusa. One grotty little pill from the Sunday Times went so far as to claim that putana vera could be bought in his local Chelsea Waitrose. A bottle of London tap-water chilled and passed through a soda-stream was slurped with every evidence of delight under the name of Aqua Robinetto. Very fitting really. After all, for twenty years Weston's novels had been palmed off as literature to these same worthless husks without their ever noticing a thing. I sometimes think that London is the world's largest catwalk for emperors. Perhaps it always was, but in the old days we weren't afraid to shout out, 'You're naked, you silly arse. You're stark bollock-naked.' Today you only have to fart in the presence of a dark-haired girl from the Sunday Times, whose father is either a sacked politician or a minor poet like myself, and you'll be puffed and profiled as the new Thackeray.





Unknown





6


The Hippopotamus

You can't imagine, if you're younger than me, which statistically speaking you are bound to be, what it is like to have been born into the booze-and-smokes genera­tion. It's one thing for a man to find, as he ages, that the generations below him are trashier, more promiscuous, less disciplined and a whole continent more pig-ignorant and shit-stupid than his own - every generation makes that discovery - but to sense all around you a creeping puritanism, to see noses wrinkle as you stumble by, to absorb the sympathetic disgust of the pink-lunged, clean-livered, clear-eyed young, to be made to feel as if you have missed a bus no one ever told you about that's going to a place you've never heard of, that can come a bit hard. All those pi, priggish Malvolios going about the place with 'do you mind, some of us have got exams tomorrow, actually' expressions on their pale prefector-ial little faces. Vomworthy.

It seems the popsy up on a stool next to mine read some of the off-pissedness in my face, for she gave me a long sideways stare, unaware that I was inspecting her inspection by way of the mirror. She slipped her bony but appetising buns off the stool and made for a chair in the corner, leaving me the sole occupant of the bar pasture, to graze the gherkins and crop the cashews alone. Knew her from somewhere. Five got you two that she was a diarist for the Standard. Leonora would know.

The great dramatist was ten minutes late, naturally, and strode through to the dining area without seeing me.





Unknown





7


Stephen Fry

The smirk on his face indicated that he had either fooled the generality of my erstwhile colleagues, no difficult thing, and been praised for his abominations, or he had heard the delightful news of my dismissal. Probably both. He wouldn't remember of course, because they never do, but it was I who discovered the little prick in the first place. That was back in the days when I used to shuttle around the fringe nightly and sit through perform­ances by companies with names like Open Stock and Shared Space; a time when my nod could guarantee transfer from an upstairs pub in Battersea to a plush drama-brothel in the West End. Michael Lake had writ­ten what in a better world would have been a perfectly ordinary play, but which was rendered extraordinary by the banality, illiteracy and po-faced sulkiness of just about every other new work that had been written that year and for the last five years before it. In a dung heap, even a plastic bead can gleam like a sapphire. Nineteen seventy-three that must have been or, at a pinch, four. Now, of course, it wasn't possible for the man to write a note to his milkman without it being lavishly mounted to univer­sal praise at the National Theatre . . . the Royal National Theatre, I beg its creepy, arse-licking pardon. The few fires of good anger and proper passion that had flickered in his early work had been pissed out by an insufferably pompous state-of-the-nation gravity and a complete indif­ference to the audience or awareness of the theatre. He, of course, as one of the generation that disdains the defi­nite article, would have said 'a complete indifference to





Unknown





8


The Hippopotamus

audience or awareness of theatre', as if Audience was a formless notion, instead of a live tangle of coughing, shuf­fling humanity, and Theatre an intellectual concept entirely divorced from actors, scenery, lighting-rigs and wooden boards. Never mind that Theatre transformed his humourless texts as best it could into just about bear­able evenings and Audience funded his Suffolk water-mill and lurid collection of Bratbys . . . they shouldn't expect his thanks for it. On the contrary, the general scheme was that we should be grateful to him. Cocky little arse-wipe.

'More of the same/ I said to the barman.

'Let me get this . . .' a voice, female, at my elbow.

'One of the finest phrases in our language/ said I, without turning round. I could see in the mirror that it was the bony-bunned creature, levering herself back up on to her stool. Absolutely love small women, they make my dick look so much bigger.

'And a Maker's Mark for me,' she added, pointing to a bottle high on the bar shelf.

A proper drinker, I noted with approval. Your experi­enced lapper knows that barmen always initially mishear the name of whatever brand you specify. 'Not Glenlivet, Glenfiddich1. No, you oaf, not a lager shandy, a large brandy . . .' Always find the bottle with your eye first and point at it when ordering. Saves time.

A hint of something Floris-ish, or at a pinch Penhaligony, wafted up as she settled herself. Adequate breastage and a slim white throat. Something neurotic





Unknown





9


Stephen Fry

in her bearing, you get to spot that quickly in female bar-flies, most of whom are usually on the brink of the kind of hysteria that smashes glassware or slaps inno­cently by-standing faces.

Roddy poured a large measure into a highball glass and she watched him closely. Another good sign. I was a close chum for a time of Gordon Fell the painter, before he got knighted and began to think himself too high for low company; we went out on the nasty together fairly regularly throughout the Sixties. Gordon always drank Old Fashioneds, had done for thirty years. Never took his eyes off the barman for a second while they were being prepared, like a blackjack player eyeing the deal. One afternoon Mim Gunter, the old witch who wielded the optics at the Dominion Club in Frith Street, a favourite pissery, was off sick and her son Col had to take her stand at the bar. Well, Col was only sixteen, poor lad didn't have the first clue what an Old Fashioned was, and bugger me if Gordon hadn't the foggiest either. I tried later to calculate how many hours of his life Gordon had spent watching while they had been assem­bled before his unblinking eyes, but ran out of napkins to do the sums on. I knew that Angostura bitters came into the formula somewhere, but that was all I knew. In the end we had to ring Mim in hospital where she was all gowned up and ready to be wheeled into the theatre to have the cancer cut from her throat. Our SOS tick­led her pink, of course. Ten feet from the phone, the other side of the bar we were, but we could still hear





Unknown





10


The Hippopotamus

her screeching the foulest insults at the hapless Col down the line and telling the doctors to bugger off, 'this was business'. She died under the knife two hours later, Gordon Fell's Proxy Old Fashioned taking its place in history as the last drink she ever mixed.

The point is, we watch the barman, but we don't take it in. It's the reassuring movement of the hands, the pleasing fitness of bar stock and cocktail apparatus, the colours, the noises, the rich, speaking scents. I've known non-drivers unable, in the same way, to recall routes they have taken daily in taxis for years.

The placing of the glass on its paper coaster, the discreet pushing-forward of the ashtray and Roddy's quiet with­drawal having been accomplished, we were free to talk.

'Good health, madam.'

'And yours.'

'Have I a feeling,' I wondered, 'that we've met?'

'That's what I was asking myself when I was here before. I decided you were too forbidding to ask, so I disappeared to the corner seat.'

'Forbidding?' I've heard this tosh before. Something to do with jowls, eyebrows and a pugnacious, Bernard Ingham-like set to the lower lip. 'As it happens,' I said, Tm a lamb.'

And then, sitting there, I realised you were Ted Wallace.'

'The same.'

'You may not remember, but . . .'

'Oh hell, we haven't done the deed, have we?'





Unknown





11


Stephen Fry

She smiled. 'Certainly not. I'm Jane Swann.'

Said as if the name was a reason for my never having sauced her.

'Jane Swann. And I know you, do I?'

'Cast your mind back to a small font in Suffolk twenty-six years ago. A baby and a rising poet. The baby cried a great deal and the rising poet made a promise to turn his back on the world, the flesh and the devil. A prom­ise that even the baby didn't believe.'

'Well, fuck my best boots! Jane . . . Jane Burrell!'

'That's me. Though in fact it's Swann now.'

'I must owe you any number of silver napkin rings. And a library's worth of moral guidance.'

She shrugged as if to say that she didn't believe me to be the kind of person whose taste in silver napkin rings or moral guidance coincided with her own. Now that I looked there was that in her cast of features which recalled her ghastly parents.

'Never got much of a chance to get to know you/ I said. 'Your mother threw me out of the house not half an hour following the baptism. Barely laid eyes on her or Patrick since.'

'I was always very proud of you, though. From a distance.'

'Proud of me?'

'Two of your poems were set texts at school. No one believed you were my godfather.'

'Bloody hell, you should have written to me. I'd've come and gabbled to the Sixth Form.'





Unknown





12


The Hippopotamus

Too true. Nothing like the parted admiring lips of a seminar of schoolgirls to make a man feel wanted. Why else would anyone try to become a poet?

She shrugged and took a sip of her bourbon. I noticed she was trembling. Not trembling perhaps, but shiver­ing. She had about her an air that reminded me of long ago. Leaning forward as if she wanted to pee, leg jogging up and down on the bar-stool stretcher. There was some­thing . . . images of wooden draining boards, Dividend tea stamps and pointy bras . . . something forlorn.

I looked at her again, the little signals came together and I remembered. Jane looked now exactly as girls in the early Sixties did when they returned from visiting an abortionist. An unmistakable confluence of gestures and mannerisms, but one which I hadn't seen in a girl for years. That blend of shame and defiance, of disgust and triumph; the urgent appeal in the eyes that encour­aged you either to mourn the desolation of a life utterly ruined or to celebrate the victory of a life made magnif­icently free, a dangerous look. I remembered only too well that if you guessed the girl's mood wrong in those days and congratulated her when she wanted to be comforted, you got a fountain of tears and a fortnight of screaming recrimination; if you consoled and sympathised when what she fancied she needed was applause and praise for a proud and heroic stand, you got a zircon-edged swipe across the chops and scornful laughter. Why the expression on my new-found god-daughter's face should have put me in mind of the atmosphere of those





Unknown





13


Stephen Fry

sordid and unmissed times, I had no idea. Women haven't needed to look as vulnerable and guilty as that for thirty years; that is a man's office now.

I coughed. 'Which poems?'

'Mm?'

'Set texts. Which ones?'

'Oh, let me see. “The Historian” and “Lines on the Face of W. H. Auden”.'

'Of course. Of bloody course. The only two that ever make the anthologies. Tricksy rubbish.'

'Do you think so?'

'Certainly not, but you'd expect me to say so.'

She favoured me with a sad-eyed smile.

'Same again, Roddy' I rapped the bar.

'I often read your theatre reviews,' she ventured, sens­ing that the smile had been a touch too obviously sym­pathetic.

'Not any more you won't.'

I told her of my sacking.

'Oh,' she said, and then, 'ohV

'Not that I give a stuff/ I assured her, in a manner that admitted no condolences. I unloosed my thoughts on the current state of British theatre, but she wasn't listening.

'You've time on your hands then?' she said once I had run down.

'Well ... I don't know so much about that. There's a more or less open invitation to fill the restaurant column in Metro . . .'





Unknown





14


The Hippopotamus

Tm not a writer, you see, and I don't know enough

'. . . and there's always room for just one more defin­itive book on the Angry Young Men . . .'

'. . . you are virtually family after all . . .'

I stopped. There were tears forming in her lower eyelids.

'What is it, my dear?'

'Look, do you mind coming home with me?'

In the cab she stayed off whatever it was that was distressing her. She sketched a short autobiography, enough to show me that she wasn't as bright or pretty or stylish or interesting as she had seemed sitting at the bar. But then, no one ever is, which is why it's always worth having shares in whisky and cosmetics.

Five years earlier, barely twenty-one, she had married a man, Swann, who traded in paintings. No children. Swann was currently in Zurich sharing his duvet with a Swiss girl, degraded enough and powerfully enough built (if Jane's bitchy glossing was to be believed) to appreci­ate his bruising bedroom habits. Jane's father Patrick had been gathered to God some six summers, which come to think, I knew, and Rebecca, the mother, still gadded about between Kensington and the Brompton Road pretending to be smart. Rebecca's other child, Jane's brother Conrad, whom I remembered as something of a turd, died in a car-crash. Pissed off his head, apparently. Good thing too. There's no excuse for crashing a car sober.





Unknown





15


Stephen Fry

Rebecca was one of the few women I ever met who . . . well, it is a fact that women do not enjoy sex. It has become almost a matter of religion for them to deny this, but it remains a fact. Women put up with sex as the price they pay for having a man, for being part of what they like to call a 'relationship', but they can do without. They do not feel the hunger, the constant stab­bing, stomach-dropping hunger that tortures us. The bugger of it is that whenever I say this I am accused of being a misogynist. For a man who has spent his entire life thinking and dreaming of women, skipping after them like a puppy trying to please his master, ordering his entire existence so that he might be brought into more contact with them and judging his life and worth solely according to his ability to attract them and make them desire him, it comes a little hard to be accused of a dislike of the sex. All I feel is profound worship, love and inferiority mixed in with a good deal of old-style self-loathing.

I know the arguments . . . Lord, who doesn't? Desire, they tell me, is a form of possession. To lust after a woman is to reduce her to the level of creature or quarry. Even worship, according to a reasoning too damned tricksy for me to follow, is interpreted as a kind of scorn. All this is, I need hardly tell you, the supremest bollocks.

Some of my best friends, as you would expect of a quondam poet, are chutney-ferrets. So too, as you would also expect of a quondam theatre critic, are some of my bitterest enemies. You couldn't ask for a better controlled





Unknown





16


The Hippopotamus

experiment to help us settle this business of the genders than the world of the nance, now could you? Gaysexuals, bottomites, benderists, settle on a name you like, taking such problems as the queer-bashers, the newspapers, the virus, the police and society as read, lead a pretty fabu­lous life. Lavatories, parks, heathland, beaches, super­markets, cemeteries, pubs, clubs and bars vibrate to their music of simple erotic exchange. A man, bent, sees another man, bent. Their eyes lock and . . . bang, sex is done. They don't have to know their partner's name, they don't have to talk to him, they don't even, in the back rooms of dark metropolitan nightclubs, have to see his bloody face. It's a male world, ordered in a precisely male way, according to the devices and desires of a strictly male sexuality. Do those big hairy faggots who pose in magazines with leather collars round their dicks and rubber tubing up their cackalleys think of themselves as oppressed? Do gay men tarting themselves up for a night in a club whine about the vile sexism which insists they must be made attractive in order to be inspected like cattle? Do they hell.

Sometimes, in my dreams, I imagine a world in which women enjoy sex: a world of heterosexual cruising areas in parks and promenades, heterosexual bars, heterosex­ual back rooms, heterosexual cinemas, heterosexual quar­ters of the town where women roam, searching for chance erotic encounters with men. Such an image is only conceivable in one's fantasising bedroom, jerked into life by an angry fist and a few spastic grunts. If women





Unknown





17


Stephen Fry

needed sex as much as men did then - duck, Ted, duck, run for cover - then there wouldn't be so many rapists around the place.

We live in the world as given, and no doubt anthropol­ogists and zoologists can tell us that it is biologically neces­sary for one of the sexes always to be hungry and the other to be mostly bored. Men have compensations, after all, for the agony of their endlessly unfulfilled desires. By and large, we run the world, control the economies and swank about with laughable displays of self-importance. This isn't a whinge. I merely want the simple truth understood and out in the open: men like sex and women don't. It has to be recognised and faced.

Women's constant rejection of such a self-evident fact doesn't help at all. Whenever I point it out to my women friends they instantly deny it; they will claim to be regular masturbators; they will claim that the idea of a good anonymous fuck is a real turn-on; they will claim that only the other day they saw a man whose bottom reminded them a little of Mel Gibson and that they got really quite juicy thinking about it. Only the other day? What about only the other minute? What about every damned sodding bloody minute of every bloody damned sodding day? Don't they see that women should pop open the champagne and celebrate the fact that they are not slavering dogs like men, they should revel in the biological luck which allows them to be rational creatures who can think about the benefits a partnership with a man can provide, who can think about





Unknown





18


The Hippopotamus

motherhood and work and friends .. . who can just plain think unlike us poor bastards who spend days that should be spent in work and higher thoughts having to realign the sore and swollen cock under the waistband of our underpants every time a set of tits walks by? Of course women get the itch now and again, we wouldn't be here as a race otherwise; of course they have genital equip­ment sensitive enough to ensure that sex can, when embarked upon, cause shiverings of pleasure, barks of delight and all the dirty rest of it. But they are not, lucky, lucky, lucky things, for ever hungry, for ever desperate, for ever longing for the base physical fact of getting their bloody rocks off. I mean, the fact is, it's five in the after­noon as I write this, and I've already tossed myself off twice today. Once first thing, in the shower, and again just after lunch, before sitting down to this. Any honest tart will tell you, sympathetically, like a nurse, that men, poor dears, just have to spit their seed. Why women should wish to claim parity in the matter of this gross imperative beats me.

As it happens, because of my trade, I've met a great many famous men, men of good report. Do you know, without exception, those I've known well enough to be able to sit with round a whisky bottle in the small hours have all confided to me that the real motivation behind their drive to become famous actors, or politicians or writers or whatever, has been the hope, somewhere deep inside them, that money, celebrity and power would enable them to get laid more easily? Whisky can rot





Unknown





19


Stephen Fry

through the layers that mask this simple truth: ambition to do well, a desire to improve the world, a need to express oneself, a vocation to serve ... all those worthy and nearly believable motives overlay the bare-arsed fact that when you get right down to it all you want to do is get right down to it.

I owe whisky that. Not a drink many women of my acquaintance are much given to, but it has saved me. Without it I should be even more of a lost and bewil­dered old cunt than I am. If it weren't for those late scotch-soaked nights I should have gone through life convinced that I was uniquely dirty and uniquely danger­ous. The ruination of a promising career, the occasional run-in with the police and the destruction of a couple of marriages is the price whisky exacted for allowing me to see that I was not alone: solid bloody bargain.

But . . . that's enough of that. I can get carried away. If you want catchpenny theories about the Sexes and all that, you can find shelves in bookshops devoted to noth­ing else. Men Biting Back, Women Biting Back From Men's Biting Back, responses to responses to counter-responses: it's like the days of the Cold War, every publication by the other side is read, every posture analysed, every twitch on the web detected and every cultural shift pored over. God knows there are columnists, cultural commentators and semi-academics enough to keep the Gender Wars industry arming and rearming for ever. Anyway, who gives a fuck what a parcel of undereducated journalists have to say about anything?





Unknown





20


The Hippopotamus

No, I fart this noxious guff in your faces not because it's important or new, nor because I want to engage in a sterile debate about it, but because you have to under­stand something of my mood and disposition that day Jane found me and dragged me off to Kensington. Her mother Rebecca, I was about to note before I leapt astride my hobby-horse and galloped off for a few para­graphs, was probably the only woman I've met who really seemed to enjoy sex for sex's sake with a relish and a need that could compare to a man's desire. She was also the only woman I've ever met whose favourite drink was whisky. A connection possibly.

Jane's house found itself somewhere near Onslow Gardens. There was money in her purse, no question, courtesy of her Uncle Michael no doubt, and, like every rich, ignorant girl these days, she passed herself off as an interior decorator.

'People saw what I'd done with the flat,' she said, as the taxi drew up outside a standard South Kensington white-pillared portico, 'and asked if I could help them out too.'

The interior lived up to my ripest expectations. Hideous flouncing swags for curtains, raw silk instead of wallpaper, you can picture the whole sham sham­bles for yourself, I'm sure. Barbarically hideous and as loudly wailing a testament to a wholly futile and empty life as can be imagined. Just how fucking idle, just how rottingly bored, do you have to be, I wondered, to sit down and dream up this kind of opulent garbage? She





Unknown





21


Stephen Fry

was standing in the middle of the room, eyebrows raised, ready for my gargles of admiration. I took a deep breath.

This is one of the most revolting rooms Fve ever stood in in all my life. It is exactly as hideous as I expected, and exactly as hideous as ten thousand rooms within pissing distance of here. It's an insult to the eye and fully as degrading a cocktail of overpriced cliche as can be found outside Beverly Hills. I would no more park my arse on that sofa with its artfully clashing and vibrantly assorted cushions than I would eat a dog-turd. Congratulations on wasting an expensive education, a bankload of money and your whole sad life. Goodbye.'

That's what I would have said with just two more fingers of whisky inside me. Instead, I managed a broken, 'My God, Jane . . .'

'You like?'

'Like isn't the word . . . it's, it's . . .'

'They tell me I have an eye,' she conceded. 'Homes and Interiors were here last week, photographing.'

'I'm sure they were,' I said.

'You should have seen the place when I moved in!'

'Such a sense of light and space,' I sighed. Always utterly safe.

'Men don't usually appreciate such things,' she said with approval, moving to the drinks table.

Tuck off, you mad, sad bitch,' I said inside, while 'Even a man couldn't fail to be knocked out by this skilful, tasteful blend of the ethnic and the domestic,' said my cowardly outspread arms.





Unknown





22


The Hippopotamus

'It was Macallan, I noticed/ she was saying. 'There is Laphroaig if you'd rather/

'N-no, the Macallan does/

She brought them over, folded a leg under herself and sank down on an ottoman, which was moronically tricked out in a design which would turn out, I supposed, to be taken from some Mayan funeral shroud or mystic Balinese menstrual cloth. The grand idea behind such a squalid episode of cultural rape and the other equally feeble, equally impertinent conceits that littered this appalling room, I supposed, was that Jane would dispose herself there, surrounded by friends, the diversity of whose drink­ing habits would justify the ludicrous range of unopened liqueur, aperitif and spirit bottles on display, while gentle yet probing conversational topics were flicked like shuttle­cocks about the room. Instead she sat, still trembling like an adolescent, with nothing more for company than a raddled has-been who once knew her parents. And he, despite the gallons of free whisky on offer, was wishing himself violently elsewhere.

She swirled the drink in its tumbler.

The first thing you have to know/ she said at last, 'is that I am dying/

Oh, marvellous. Ideal. Simply perfect.

'Jane . . /

Tm sorry/ She lit a cigarette with jerky movements. That was crass, actually/

Damned right. Nobody seems to understand that in such matters the tact and sympathy should come from





Unknown





23


Stephen Fry

the one who is about to die, not the poor bugger who has to take the news. She'd come to the right shop, though. Fve known enough death not to be nice about the forms of it.

'Are you quite sure?'

The doctors are unanimous. Leukaemia. Fve run out of remissions.'

That's a smeller, Jane. Fm very sorry.'

Thank you.'

'Scared?'

'Not any more.'

'I suppose it's hard to tell when the axe might fall?'

'Soon, they tell me . . . within three months.'

'Well, my darling. If you've made peace with your enemies and said goodbye to your friends, you shouldn't be too sorry to leave the party early. It's a grotty world and a grotty age and we'll all be joining you soon enough.'

She smiled a thin smile. That's one way of looking at it.'

The only way'

Now that I knew, of course, I could see it in her. It was there in the brightness of the eye and the tightness and pallor of the skin. The boniness of body that I had read as neurotic rich girl's pseudo-anorexia, that too might in justice be attributed to sickness.

She leaned back, and breathed out. Just showing off now, I thought. The exhalation seemed to me to be designed to demonstrate how mature and wise her death





Unknown





24


The Hippopotamus

sentence had made her, how it had 'put things in perspec­tive' and set her curiously free.

'I told you that I wasn't scared/ she said, 'and I'm not. But at first I was. Simply hysterical. Tell me . . /

Tm listening.'

'I don't really know where to begin. What do you think . . . what do you think of priests?'

I sat down. Here we go; I thought. Here we ruddy go. The laying-on of hands. If not priests, essential oils; if not essential oils, needles; if not needles, herbs; if not herbs, lumps of translucent rock and etheric sheaths.

'Priests . . .' I said. 'Are we speaking of the Romish or the Anglican kind?'

'I don't know. I take it you're an atheist?'

'I sometimes slip, but broadly speaking, yes. I try not to think about it. The cassocked buzzards have been wheeling in the air above you, have they? Fighting for scavenging rights to your soul?'

'No, no . . . it's not that. Oh dear . . .'

She got up and paced about, while I sat, gripped my whisky and waited. I thought about life as a restaurant critic, wondered if there were the seeds of any late-flowering poetry in me and reflected, with the intolerance of the healthy, that leukaemia was an affliction that I would be perfectly capable of snapping out of. Brace up and walk it off, woman, I said to myself. If you can't tell a few white corpuscles to piss off out of it, what are you?

At last she turned, a decision arrived at.

'The point is/ she said, 'that a strange thing has happened.





Unknown





25


Stephen Fry

In my family. I don't understand it, but I think it might interest you. As a writer.'

'Oh ah?' Whenever people say 'as a writer, you'll find this very fascinating/ I prepare myself for thunderous boredom and numbing banality. Besides, what kind of writer was I anyway? She was trying to flatter me into attention.

'I thought, as you aren't . . . ah . . . occupied at the moment, that you might be able to help me. Something needs investigating.'

'Well, my dear, I don't know exactly what you had in mind. Fm not what you might call an investigative jour­nalist. Fm not actually any kind of journalist at all. I can't really imagine what a failed poet, failed novelist, failed theatre critic and only marginally successful failure could possibly offer.'

'Well, you know the people concerned, you see, and . . .'

'WoahF I held up a hand. 'Jane. My darling. Angel. Poppet. In sappier happier days, your mother and I used to stick it away. That's all. I haven't seen her in a coon's age. She said goodbye to me twenty-odd years ago in a blizzard of flung christening cake and savage abuse.'

'I'm not talking about Mummy, I'm talking about her brother.'

'Logan? You're talking about Logan? Jesus suffering fuck, woman . . .' I tried to say more, but the Cough had come upon me, as it does these days. It starts as





Unknown





26


The Hippopotamus

the smallest tickle in the throat and can build, though I say so myself as shouldn't, into a not unimpressive display. Something between a vomiting donkey and an explosion at a custard factory. Jane watched without sympathy as I choked and wheezed myself to relative calm.

'You knew him/ she repeated, 'you knew him better than most. And you are, don't forget, David's godfather.'

'Well,' I panted, wiping away the tears from my cheeks, 'as it happens I haven't forgotten. Sent him a confirma­tion present only the other week. Got a cutely pi response.'

'Cutie pie?'

'Pi, as in . . . oh, never mind.'

Nobody can speak English any more.

'So you knew about David's confirmation, but not about mine.'

Lord, what a whining old sow.

'I told you,' I explained patiently, 'your mother won't have anything to do with me. I saw her three or four years ago at Swafford and I could see then that she still hadn't forgiven me. Your Uncle Michael, on the other hand, has a large nature.'

'And an even larger bank balance.'

This was not worthy of a reply. It was true that I valued Michael's friendship highly and his sister Rebecca's not a whit, but I liked to think that there was more to it than money. But then, I liked to think that the world venerated poets and that one day wars would end and





Unknown





27


Stephen Fry

television personalities be wiped out by a fatal virus. Between what I liked to think and the cold veridical state of things fell one hell of a shadow.

1 would want you to think of this as a commission. I'm not an especially rich woman . . .'

No, of course you aren't, are you? You've pissed it all away on Lalique flacons, Peruvian birthing-blankets and Namibian labia-jewellery, you senseless cow.

\ . . but I could offer you a hundred thousand now and the rest . . . either later or left to you in my will.'

'A hundred thousand?' I caught sight of myself in the artfully, fartfully tarnished mirror above the mantelpiece. I saw a red mullet, gaping, pop-eyed, purple and very, very greedy.

'A quarter of a million all told.'

A quarter of a million?'

'Yes.'

This isn't lire, is it? I mean, you are talking about pounds sterling?'

She nodded gravely.

'I don't . . . Jane ... a quarter of a million is a lot of money and is, I won't attempt to deny it, quite monstrously appealing to me. But I don't know if I have it in me to do anything for anyone which, in any kind of honesty, is worth a tenth of that sum.'

'You will have to work hard,' Jane said.

I could see from the set of her mouth that nothing I could say was going to make much difference to her. Her mind, like her face, was fully made up.





Unknown





28


The Hippopotamus

'And you will have to work fast. Whatever you uncover I need to know before I die. That is if I do.'

'Er . . . if you do what?'

'If I do die.'

If you do die?'

'If I do die.'

We were beginning to sound like a couple of pissed Nigerians.

'But you said . . .'

'No, the doctors said, the doctors said that I was going to die. I don't believe I am. That is the point.'

Well, there it was. If she did get around to giving me a cheque, it would in all likelihood be signed 'Jessica Rabbit' or 'L. Ron Hubbard'.

'I believe that I have been saved, you see.'

'Ah. Right. Saved. Yes. Lovely'

She rose and went over to a lacquered bureau, smil­ing the seraphic smile of the irretrievably crazed.

'I know what you're thinking, but it isn't like that. You'll see.' She took a cheque-book from the bureau and began to write. 'There1.' She tore off a cheque and waved it in the air, a pennant of good faith drying in the breeze.

'Look . . .' I managed. 'Jane. In all honour, or such tatters of it as I have remaining, I shouldn't take your money. I don't understand what it is that you want me to do, I doubt that I have the capacity to do it and it is, to put it nicely, a racing certainty that you are not in your right mind. You should see a ... a chap.'





Unknown





29


Stephen Fry

What I meant by 'a chap' I wasn't sure. Doctor, psychi­atrist or priest, I suppose. Frothing hypocrisy on the part of a man who doesn't believe in such ordure, but what the hell else is one supposed to say?

'I want you to go to Swafford. I want you to tell the family that you are writing Uncle Michael's biography,' she said, handing me the cheque. 'You are probably the only person alive he would allow to do such a thing.'

A properly signed and dated cheque for one hundred thousand pounds lay on my lap in front of me. My bank had a branch near South Ken tube station. I could be out of the house and filling in a deposit slip in ten minutes.

There are,' I said, 'professional writers who will compile family histories for you at a fraction of that price. Vanity publishing, they call it.'

'You don't understand,' she said. 'You won't be writ­ing a family history, you will be reporting a phenomena.'

'Phenomenon,' I muttered irritably.

'You will be witnessing a miracle.1

'A miracle. I see. And what kind of miracle precisely?'

She paused. 'I want you to go to Swafford and make your reports,' she said. 'Write to me constantly. I want to see if you notice anything. You think my mind has gone, but I know that if you go there, you will see for yourself what there is to be seen.'

I left the house and rolled up the Brompton Road, reflecting as busily as a wet mirror on a sunny day. Jane was mad, certainly, but her cheque was crossed and endearingly sane. It was a question now of how to wangle





Unknown





30


The Hippopotamus

an invitation to Swafford. It was a question of how much work I had to do for the money. It was a question of what kind of work I had to do for that money. I damned the woman for not telling me what to look out for. If she had given me the slightest indication I could then have at least contrived to bolster her delusions by seem­ing to confirm them. But what were those delusions? My last visit to Swafford had been amusing enough but hardly revealing of miracles.





Unknown





31


2

Lord Logan knelt down between his sons and pointed to the tower. David looked up. Through the night mist he saw the clock face, newly painted gold on blue.

'Very smart, Dad/ Simon was saying. 'Is that real gold?'

Lord Logan laughed.

'Gilt.'

'It is gold in the drawing room though. You said/

'In the drawing room, yes.'

'And in the Chinese Room, Dad, and the chapel/

'Gold leaf/

'Gold leaf/ Simon repeated with satisfaction. 'The decorators showed me the book. Every single page was pure gold/

David was screwing up his eyes. The electric light spun the mist all around the clock into a yellow ball that suspended itself above the stable yard.

'Now then/ said Lord Logan. 'What's the time?'

'Uh oh/ said Simon, putting his hands over his ears.

David looked too and saw that it was about half a minute to ten o'clock. He counted down the seconds in his head.

Lord Logan hugged the boys to him and made a tick-





Unknown





32


The Hippopotamus

tock noise with his tongue. He felt the warmth of David's hand in his and the chill of Simon's.

David listened for the grinding whir that came before the chime. One of the big hunters was stamping in his stall and, farther away in the kennel block, David heard the whining of the beagle pups.

No sound came from the clock. They were not stand­ing directly in front of it so David supposed their angle made the hour hand look more advanced than it really was. He began a fresh count-down from ten. Simon had told him once that you could accurately count seconds if you put the word 'alligator' between each number.

Ten alligator, nine alligator, eight alligator, seven alli­gator, six alligator . . .' David said to himself.

Simon removed his hands from his ears.

'Dad!' he said reproachfully. Only these holidays had he switched from Daddy to Dad and he liked to use the new word as much as possible.

'You see?' Lord Logan jigged with pleasure.

There was no doubt that, whatever their angle to the clock, it was now a clear minute past ten.

'But I liked the bong,' said Simon.

'Ah, but you don't understand. There's a control fitted. It still chimes during the day, but when it's dark, it doesn't.'

'Brilliant! That's brilliant, Dad!'

'Something had to be done. The twins were being woken up every hour, on the hour.'





Unknown





33


Stephen Fry

'I know, Dad/ said Simon. 'My room's just down the corridor, don't forget.'

'Ah well/ said Lord Logan, standing up and dusting his knees with the back of his hand. That's another thing. Come on, David, you're not too big . . . hup!' David jumped on to his father's shoulders and they made their way back to the house. 'Now that you're thirteen, Simon, we ought to take you out of the nursery and give you a proper bedroom, don't you think?'

'Oh boy,' said Simon.

'I mean, if you're going to be joining the guns on Boxing Day.'

'Daddy!' Simon kicked the gravel in excitement. 'Oh boy, oh boy, oh boy!'

Lord Logan hitched David up further on to his shoul­ders.

'Woof! I'm getting too old for this, Davey.'

David knew, however, that although he would soon be twelve, he was small and light for his age and that his father could have carried him five miles without a murmur.

*

A fortnight later David lay on his bed and stared at the ceiling, just as he had the night before. The night before had been Christmas Eve when all children lie awake to surprise their fathers. Not that it would have been Lord Logan himself, Simon claimed.

'He gets Podmore to dress up and dump them in our rooms.'





Unknown





34


The Hippopotamus

'No, I bet it is Daddy. He'd enjoy it/

David had not managed to stay awake long enough to find out. Tonight he would certainly stay awake. He absolutely had to.

The brand-new alarm clock, a Christmas present from Aunt Rebecca, ticked on his bedside table.

Half past one.

The most important thing was not to wake up the twins. They were more than a year old and, since the muffling of the stable clock, they had started, in Nanny's words, to sleep through. But you never knew with the twins. They were always capable of creating an uproar. So that they would be especially tired, David had spent an hour entertaining them in their cots earlier in the evening. He had drawn pictures for them with crayons and pulled faces, hummed tunes and danced stupidly around the room until it was time for the goodnight visit.

They seem rather hot, Sheila.'

'Yes, Lady Anne. David has been exciting them.'

'Davey?'

'I was just reading to them, Mummy'

'Oh. Funny boy. Never mind, at least they'll sleep. Won't you, my darlings? Night night, Edward. Night night, James.'

A quarter to two.

David stood up and pulled a pair of dark brown corduroy trousers over his pyjamas. He put on his games pullover from school, which was navy blue with a roll-over collar,





Unknown





35


Stephen Fry

and chose a woolly hat and black plimsolls, also from school.

Looking at himself in the mirror, he wondered if perhaps he shouldn't smear boot polish on his face. He decided not to. It would be simply disastrous if he couldn't wash it off and everybody saw traces next morning.

Two o'clock.

He looked out of the window. Still dry. A clear night in fact, with just a hint of mist. That would mean a good hard frost and that would mean no footprints. God was on his side. God and Nature.

David returned to his bed, shook a pillow out of its slip, folded the slip neatly and pushed it up inside his jumper, securing it behind the waistband of his pyjamas and trousers.

He went to the door and tip-toed out into the corri­dor.

The door of the twins' room opposite was open; a twenty-watt night-light threw a weak yellow glow into the passageway. David could hear the twins breathing in time with each other.

As he passed the door of Simon's old room David edged himself closer to the wall, to avoid a loose board in the middle of the floor. Nanny was the only grown­up who slept near by, but she could wake up at the slightest sound, so he had to be most terribly careful.

David inched along the wall towards the pass door that led into the main part of the house. During the day you could bounce balls, slam cupboards and scream and





Unknown





36


The Hippopotamus

shout in the nursery wing without ever being heard, but at night the smallest sound was magnified. His breath­ing alone seemed to make a dreadful amount of noise. The walls, the carpet, the roof, the radiator pipes, every­thing shifted, clicked and hummed like parts of a machine.

He opened the door. There came to him a faint scent of cigar smoke and the important ticking of a long-case clock. The north passage lay ahead and beyond it the stairs. David let the door swing silently behind him and stole forwards with the great Seven League Boots stride of the stealthy. He couldn't remember exactly how many guests were staying; he thought at least twelve, with another ten or eleven coming the next day for the shoot­ing. To be sure of things, he would have to go by the bedrooms as though each one were occupied by a very light sleeper.

He took the centre of the corridor now because he knew that there were cabinets and tables set along the walls with china and silver and glass on them which would make a lot of noise if he brushed against them.

He was about half-way down, with the marble gleam of the staircase now in view ahead of him, when a sudden sound brought him to a stop. A yellow line of light had appeared under the door of the room he was passing, the Hobhouse Room. Frozen mid-stride, David strained to listen, mouth open, blood hammering in his ears. He heard the silken rustle of a dressing-gown being drawn on.

With a bolt of fright he remembered that there was





Unknown





37


Stephen Fry-

no bathroom in the Hobhouse Room. He leapt along the corridor in a panic, stopping by the long-case clock at the end where he flattened himself against the wall. He leaned back and panted as quietly as he could, trying to synchronise his breathing with the great gulping beats of the pendulum that swung inside the clock beside him.

He heard the door of the Hobhouse Room open and footsteps approach.

David couldn't understand what was happening. He wanted to scream out 'But the bathroom's the other way!'

The footsteps came closer and closer. David held his breath and closed his eyes tight. The vibrations of the clock went through his body, each tick like an electric shock.

The footsteps stopped. 'He's looking at me,' thought David. 'I can hear him breathe.'

Then came the sound of fingernails gently tapping on wood. There was a bedroom door the other side of the clock from David. The Leighton Room, where Aunt Rebecca always stayed. David heard her whispered voice.

'Max? Is that you?'

A man's voice close by David answered, hoarse and cross.

'Let me in, it's bloody freezing out here.'

The door opened and closed.

David waited. Laughter and other sounds came from inside the Leighton Room. He knew that Aunt Rebecca loved games of all kinds. He decided to gamble on the likelihood of her and the man, Max, staying in the room





Unknown





38


The Hippopotamus

for some time. David took a deep breath, stepped forwards and headed for the staircase.

His route was meticulously planned and rather compli­cated. He had to go first to the library, then to the kitchen, then outside through the scullery into the stable yard, and finally back through the kitchen to the library again.

It was dark at the top of the stairs. David took off his plimsolls so that their rubber soles wouldn't squeak on the marble. He went down slowly, feeling the corners of the picture-frames on the wall as he descended. His hand found the corner of the last painting, a huge Tiepolo every inch of which he knew, so now he could be sure he was on the last step. At the bottom, he turned left and went quickly across the open hall, the shortest route to the library.

Half-way across the hall he ran into something huge, something sharp and bristly that hugged him and stung his face. The shock was so great, the sense of being so completely in the grip of what he could only suppose to be a ghost or wild animal, that without meaning to he shouted out; a short howl of pain and fright.

At the very moment he cried out, David realised that what he had run into was only the Christmas tree. Disgusted with himself at such cowardice, he spat a needle from his mouth, stepped back from the tree and listened. There were no sounds of any movement upstairs: no shouts, no sleepy grumbles, no wails from the twins, only a gentle tinkle from the decorations as





Unknown





39


Stephen Fry

the tree recovered from the collision. David's panicky yell had probably not been so very loud after all. In his head he replayed the sound and realised that really it had been no more than a husky gasp.

Circling the tree warily David made for the library.

In the library the smell of cigar smoke was so strong it made the hairs at the back of his legs prickle. It was warm too; a faint orange glow in the fireplace showed that the fire had not yet died. David closed the door behind him and felt for the light switch.

Blinking at the sudden brightness, he looked about the room. He was glad to see that the shutters were closed. There would be no oblongs of light thrown on to the South Lawn, which would have been visible to anyone looking out of a window from one of the upstairs bedrooms.

On the fifth shelf, behind Lord Logan's enormous desk, there was a neat line of twelve old books entitled Crabshawe's History of the Countie of Norfolk. They were bound in sand-coloured leather and stamped with gold lettering.

David moved his finger along the line, like a browser in a bookshop, until he came to Volume VI, which he pulled out and laid on the desk. He inserted his hand in the gap on the shelf and felt for the lever. He pulled hard and was shocked by the great twang of the spring as it released the catch. By day the mechanism seemed as quiet as a whisper.

The whole section of shelving swung open and David





Unknown





40


The Hippopotamus

went through the secret doorway and into the room beyond.

He couldn't find a light switch in this room, so he had to work by the light spilling in from the library. He could see enough, however, and sense even more: the heads of fox and stag bearing down on him, the light aroma of gun-oil and the thudding of yet another big clock.

He made for a small bureau against the wall, between two gun cabinets. On the bureau was a large padded leather book from Smythson's of Bond Street. 'Game Book' it said. Simon had given it to Daddy two Christmases ago. David remembered excitedly asking to see it, expecting it to be a book perhaps like Hoyle's, some sort of encyclopedia or dictionary of games and pastimes. He had not been pleased to find out that it was just blank pages, with ruled ledgers headed 'Date', 'Breed', 'Guns', 'Number killed' and so on.

Behind the game book there was a small drawer. David pulled it open and stirred the contents with a finger until he found - amongst the rubber bands, fishing flies and squares of lint - a key, around which his fist closed with a relieved and determined clutch. Now it was time to go down to the kitchen.

He took the greatest care to avoid the Christmas tree as he crossed the hall. Once he knew it was there he could see it quite clearly, of course, standing guard over the staircase like a huge and shaggy bear.

David shivered at the sudden breath of warm air that





Unknown





41


Stephen Fry

met him when he opened the red baize door and went down the steps into the kitchen.

Moonlight came in through the high semi-circular windows; it gleamed on wickerwork hampers that had been laid out ready for the great breakfast. David edged round the central table, sat down on a chair at the end nearest the stove and put his plimsolls back on. His elbow touched a piece of grease-proof paper on the table. He lifted a corner of the paper up and could smell smoked ham. Immediately his throat began to contract and spasm. He turned away and breathed deeply, but had to bury his face in his forearm to muffle the sound of his dry retching. After a while he stood and wiped the tears from his eyes.

At the far end of the kitchen was a door which led to the sculleries and pantries. David went through and turned on the light.

The machinery in the cold-room hummed and down the end of the passage a large black cat came up to him, stretching its legs as it walked.

'ShV said David.

The cat twined itself around his legs and began to purr.

'Come on, then/ David said and the cat accompanied him to the larder door.

The second shelf of the larder, neatly ordered, contained sugar, flour, tins of baking powder, packets of yeast, sachets of gelatine, spices, cake decorations and cartons of candied peel, all in huge catering-size packs.





Unknown





42


The Hippopotamus

There were children's party napkins there too, boxes of meringue nests, bags of confetti, waxed paper jelly-bowls and tins of Playbox biscuits.

David took out the pillow-case from under his pullover and began to fill it. He dropped a piece of angelica on the floor for the cat, who sniffed, shook a paw and stalked out, disgusted.

When the pillow-case had been filled with the right things, David left the larder, switched off the light in the passageway and returned to the kitchen.

With his pillow-case over his shoulder like Father Christmas, he let himself out of the back door.

He walked through the night, clouds of vapour coming from his mouth and nostrils. He felt happy and charged with energy and vigour.

The outhouse he was heading for used once to be part of the laundry buildings and lay between the stable block and the gamekeeper's cottage. Simon called it the 'B and U room now, for beaters and loaders.

The moon, high in the starlit sky, shone on the door and lit the iron padlock with a lick of silver. David took the key from his pocket and unfastened the lock.

Far away, in the spinneys and copses, the pheasants shifted in their roosts. Rabbits fled from barking vixens, owls swooped on scampering voles and, back in the yard, the black cat that unseen by David had slipped with him out of the kitchen, batted a dying mouse from paw to paw.

Sitting on a large box marked 'Eley', David straddled





Unknown





43


Stephen Fry

the machine. He pulled back the brass lever and hummed a little tune to himself as he engaged the treadle.

II

Simon jumped out of the Range Rover with Soda, his spaniel bitch, and looked amongst the crowd of beaters for a sign of his brother. Eventually he saw David stand­ing apart from the others, stroking the head of one of the labradors. At a whistle from Henry the gamekeeper's lad, the dog turned and sprinted towards the group of pickers-up who were making ready to leave. David, deprived of company, looked up in Simon's direction. Simon immediately pretended to be scanning the sky and smelling the wind.

Ahead of him lay the drive, a long avenue of beech, oak and elm. Simon closed up his gun, brought it to his shoulder and sighted into the air above the trees.

'Blaml' he whispered. 'Blaml'

A giant hand landed on his shoulder. 'If a sportsman true you'd be, Listen carefully to me, Never, never let your gun . . .'

Simon joined in, \ . . Pointed be at anyone. When a hedge or fence you cross, Though of time it cause a loss, From your gun the cartridge take, For the greatest safety sake.'

Lord Logan nodded.

'Sorry, Dad,' said Simon, breaking the gun. 1 was just . . . you know.'





Unknown





44


The Hippopotamus

His father shrugged with a smile. He looked over his shoulders like a conspirator and drew a silver hip-flask from his coat pocket. 'Chivas Regal/ he said. 'One nip only. Don't tell your mother.'

The whisky stung Simon's throat and tears started in his eyes.

'Whooh!' he said. Thanks, Dad.'

Lord Logan screwed the lid back on and looked down at Simon's dog. 'Whisky and Soda/ he said and winked.

Simon laughed. Today he was the only gun with his own dog. Everybody else would have to rely on pickers-up to retrieve their dead game. Soda was Simon's dog and she would bring his kills back to him personally.

'We're numbering eight, we're moving two!' called Henry.

Lord Logan looked in the direction of the drive, where the drawing of numbers was under way. 'Have you drawn?' he asked.

Simon shook his head.

'Good/ said his father. 'Best not. Let the older guns fight it out, eh? We'll double-bank you behind Conrad.'

Simon's face fell. 'But I want to be at the front!'

'Conrad's a dreadful shot. You'll do well.' Lord Logan's mouth wrinkled in the special distaste it reserved for whines and whinges.

Simon blushed. 'Thanks, Dad.'

'Well, then. Let battle commence.'

Simon kept a few paces behind to watch the effect his father had on the others as he joined the main group





Unknown





45


Stephen Fry

of guns. Men and women stepped back, eyes sliding covertly in his direction. Everybody smiled. Simon knew that some were smiling because of the preposterously perfect condition of his father's clothes, the shining Purdey guns, the gleaming new leather, the perfectly made hat from Lock's, the hand-warmers, the cartridge belt, the tailored tweed coat and the tight narrow leggings that tapered down from his broad bulk - dark stockings over moleskins. Dad knew too and he didn't care. He liked the best of everything and said so often enough. Mummy's friends and family were in the tattiest old tweeds and muddiest boots and thought highly of them­selves because of it. Dad let them smile. He knew they smiled for other reasons too.

David and the other beaters had gone off round to the wood behind the avenue. The guns and loaders, all men, were beginning to arrange themselves, two to a peg. Simon went up to one of the loaders.

'Just chuck us some boxes,' he said.

The grown-ups had a loader each and a pair of guns, so that they could keep shooting with one gun while the other was being loaded. Simon did have two twelve-bore guns, but one was an over-and-under, a present from Aunt Rebecca who, being a woman, had no idea that over-and-unders were not on; they were fit only for foreigners, armed robbers and weekend nobodies. The barrels on a proper shotgun, everybody knew, had to be side by side. To make matters worse, Aunt Rebecca's gun had a box lock instead of a side lock, which put it





Unknown





46


The Hippopotamus

completely beyond the pale. Therefore, beautiful as it may have been and ideal for a private and solitary rough shoot, Simon had left it behind. He prayed that Aunt Rebecca, who was miling about around the back with Uncle Ted and a group of women and spectators from the village, wouldn't notice. Simon did have another shotgun, a four-ten which he had grown up on, potting at crows and rabbits, but after a long debate with himself he had decided that he should take just his one depend­able old twelve-bore and do his own loading.

He filled the pockets of his Barbour with cartridge boxes. Soda danced around him displaying all the excitement and pleasure that Simon was trying hard to conceal.

He saw his seventeen-year-old cousin Conrad, drawn at number three, and took up a position behind him.

'Oh bloody hell/ said Conrad. 'Don't stand behind me. I don't want to die.'

Simon blushed.

'I'm a good shot,' he muttered.

'Got a bloody dog with you, too, have you? Well, I'm not having any running-in.'

'She won't run in,' said Simon indignantly.

'Well, she'd better not.'

'ShV Lord Draycott, an elderly man further along the line, scowled at Conrad from under a rather wide cloth cap.

Conrad snorted contemptuously. 'It's pheasant, for God's sake! They're virtually deaf.'





Unknown





47


Stephen Fry

These are wild birds, Conrad/ whispered the man next to Conrad, whom Simon recognised as Max Clifford, a friend of his father's. 'Sporting birds. They startle easily. They're not hand-reared as they are in Hampshire.'

Somehow, in Max's soft tones, the word 'Hampshire' came out as a terrible insult. Conrad reddened and turned away. Simon settled himself. Soda sat neatly beside him, tongue out, panting gently. Quiet descended.

Simon continued to recite 'A Father's Advice' to himself, under his breath.

'Keep your place and silent be, Game can hear and game can see. Don't be greedy, better spared, Is a pheas­ant than one shared.'

A cock pheasant strolled out of the wood and into the main drive towards them, clucking loudly. Someone laughed.

Simon felt inside his pocket and drew out two cartridges.

'If 'twixt you and neighbouring gun, Bird may fly and beast may run, Let this maxim e'er be thine, Follow not across the line.'

The pheasant continued its strut down the avenue, neck thrusting arrogantly backwards and forwards.

Simon pushed the cartridges into the barrels and closed the gun.

'Stops and beaters oft unseen, Lurk behind some leafy screen. Calm and steady always be, Never shoot where you can't see.'

The pheasant's cheerful walk slowed. He peered





Unknown





48


The Hippopotamus

doubtfully ahead and seemed slowly to become aware of a line of pink faces, of brown, green and russet tweed and of shining gun-metal ranged against him. He checked his swagger and set his neck forward in goggling disbe­lief, which reminded Simon of the cross-eyed barman in Laurel and Hardy films.

Simon breathed hard through his nose and swallowed.

'You may kill or you may miss/ he whispered to himself, 'But at all times think of this, All the pheasants ever bred, Won't repay for one man dead.'

The pheasant threw a glance back into the spinney he had just left. Simon thought the bird had made some connection. With a rising note of outrage in his throat, as if trying to send some desperate warning signal to his family and friends back there in the wood, the pheasant rose.

At the same time, Lord Logan brought to his lips a silver horn and blew. Deep within the woods a mighty roar went up and the beaters began to stamp and strike the ground.

Simon licked his lips and banged his feet into a solid two o'clock position, weight forward on his left leg. His right thumb flicked the safety catch. The other guns rose from their shooting-sticks. Soda squared herself.

All at once the air was filled with squadrons of rock­eting pheasants. Gunshots sounded everywhere like harsh coughs, and little puffs of smoke blossomed in the air.

Simon had practised this in his head so many times. The birds had to come high to clear the trees, which is





Unknown





49


Stephen Fry

why the guns were positioned where they were. But they came so fast: three or four hundred flushed in one go. By the time Simon could sight they were already over his head. He followed one bird up from the cover and fired off the first barrel just before his gun reached the vertical. He brought the gun down fifty degrees, followed another bird and managed to loose off again, aiming for the beak.

He had broken his gun and was scrambling to reload when a shout came from the woods.

'Steady boys: whoa, whoa! Hold hard!'

The last few pheasants fluttered past and Simon heard echoes of the closing volleys of gunshot rattle off the windows and brick-work of the house half a mile behind them. The first flush had taken perhaps forty seconds and he had only just managed to get off both barrels. Conrad had fired off fourteen rounds. There rose a bark­ing and yelping through the trees.

'Go on, Soda!' shouted Simon. 'Go on, girl!'

Soda sprang forward and dashed into the woods: Simon thought he might have downed a bird with his second barrel. Soda would have seen.

A shout went up.

'Look! Look!'

Simon saw, now that the gun smoke had cleared, that the air ahead of them was full of what appeared to be falling petals. The pickers-up were standing in bewilder­ment, their dogs circling them and whimpering as a coloured blizzard swirled about.





Unknown





50


The Hippopotamus

Simon heard Aunt Rebecca's voice behind him. 'It's . . . for God's sake . . . it's confettiV

'Bravo! Charming!' said Uncle Ted.

'Bloody hell!' said Conrad.

Soda trotted out of the spinney with a pheasant in her mouth which she dropped at her master's feet.

Simon looked down in disgust. 'It's a runner/ he said. The bird was still alive, its beak opening and closing, its crooked, wrinkled legs working frantically. Simon picked it up and twisted its neck until he heard a crack.

The others gathered round.

'What the hell's going on?'

'This is the only bloody kill!'

Simon looked up in embarrassment as everyone crowded round him.

'What do you mean?' he said.

'We mean,' said Conrad, 'that no one else has bagged a single sodding bird. That's what we mean.'

Simon didn't understand. The first flush in a well-stocked cover like that should mean a kill of at least a hundred birds.

Lord Logan took the pheasant out of Simon's hands. Henry, the gamekeeper's assistant, was hurrying forward towards them, an expression both of wild fury and of complete puzzlement on his face.

Lord Logan examined the pheasant. There were little silver balls caught up in its gorge.

'Silver shot?' someone exclaimed. 'That's going it, even for you, Michael.'





Unknown





51


Stephen Fry

Simon saw his father's eyes flash for a second under his heavy brows.

This is not shot/ he said, rolling a single ball between his thumb and forefinger. 'Nor is it silver.'

He put the ball in his mouth and crunched it between his teeth.

'Sugar]' he said mournfully. 'Just sugar.' Simon took a fresh cartridge out of his pocket and began to unpick the end. Into his father's outstretched palm he poured out a heap of coloured hundreds and thousands, silvered sugar balls, rice and a wad of confetti. 'Christ!' said Conrad. 'Sabs. It's the bloody sabs.' 'Sabs?' said Simon. 'They wouldn't . . .' 'Sabs! Sabs! We've been bloody sabbed!' The cry went up and gathered into a roar that mingled with the chuckling of the pheasants as they settled back in their roosts and mingled too with the weeping, squeal­ing laughter of one of the beaters who had lagged behind the others and now lay on the ground, deep in the wood, wriggling with happiness and, true to his trade, beating and beating and beating the ground with small fists.





Unknown





52


3

Dear Uncle Ted,

This is just a note to thank you so much for your present. I'm very sorry you couldn't make the serv­ice itself, but I do understand that your life is immensely busy.

Mr Bridges, my English master, tells me that what you sent is a first edition, which is extremely valu­able. I am very touched by your generosity. I have never read the Four Quartets before, although we did The Waste Land for GCSE which I enjoyed enormously, so I am looking forward very much to reading and understanding these new poems. Are they connected at all to Beethoven's quartets, I wonder? My favourite poet is Wordsworth at the moment.

The confirmation was magnificent. The Bishop of St Alban's spoke to us all beforehand and reminded us of the solemnity of the occasion. When the moment came for him to lay his hand upon my head I found myself crying. I hope you don't think that was wrong of me. I think I was moved more by the idea of the apostolic succession than by anything else. Christ laid a hand on Peter's head,





Unknown





53


Stephen Fry

Peter became Bishop of Rome and he laid a hand on the head of everyone else who became a bishop. Even though we broke with Rome in the sixteenth century the bishops of the Church of England can trace themselves by a hand laid on the head, all the way back to Christ.

When I bit the wafer I was surprised by how tasty it was. I had been told by everyone that it would be disgusting - like cardboard. Actually it reminded me of the rice-paper that you find on the underside of a macaroon. The wine was very sweet, but that's how I prefer it anyway.

You said that you hoped confirmation would live up to its name and that, as well as confirming my faith publicly, the service would confirm something in me privately. Well, I suppose it has, really. Everyone is agreed that the world is getting to be a worse place year by year. There is more crime, more poverty, more corruption, more distress. I think that Grace, which we talked about a lot in confirm­ation classes, is probably the only thing that can save the world. That's very idealistic I know, but I think it makes more logical sense than anything else. Grace is about looking inwards not outwards. If everyone looked inwards to their own souls, or psyches or whatever word you want to use, then all the sins in the world would disappear. If only we could all put up our hands and say 'the problems are all my fault' there would be no problems.





Unknown





54


The Hippopotamus

Simon has been made house captain this term and is in the first XV, so we are all very proud of him. He wants to go into the army after school, but Daddy wants him to try for Oxford. I'm not sure what I want to do, not the army anyway. I would truly love, more than anything else, to be a poet like you.

After all, what else is worth doing?

The world is too much with us; late and soon, Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers: Little we see in Nature that is ours; We have given our hearts away . . .

It's now after prep and I've just found a very marvellous line in the Four Quartets that talks about how the stones of a building don't reflect light, but actually absorb it. I think that is saying something about the love of God.

I hope you will absorb my love and thanks for a wonderful present.

Lots of love

David XXX

I tried my damnedest to recall whether myself at that age, I had been quite such a pi, punchable little shit as





Unknown





55


Stephen Fry

this. I remembered listening to illicit jazz and climbing ladders to catch the housemaster's daughter undressing; I remembered all the fights, farts and fidgets of a bog-standard, bog-quality British education; I remembered howling with injustice, roaring with passion and grunt­ing with loneliness; I remembered talking about poetry certainly and pledging that the poets of the future would grab mankind by the balls and give such a vicious twist that the whole human race would scream for mercy. But wanking on about Grace and sin? Spraying out pissy drib­bles of Wordsworth sonnetry? I don't think so. The Bishop of St Alban's spoke to us all beforehand and reminded us of the solemnity of the occasion' indeed. Did the sanc­timonious squirt think he was writing a letter to a god­father or an article for the school magazine? 'I would truly love, more than anything else, to be a poet like you.? Did he mean he would love to be, like me, a poet? Or was he crawly (and idiotic] enough to mean that he wanted to be the kind of poet I was? Cold Christ and tangled Trinities, what an anus.

4 Butler's Yard

St James's

LONDON SW1

Dear David,

What a remarkable letter. I am delighted that my little present has hit the mark so surely.

I too was disappointed not to be amongst those





Unknown





56


The Hippopotamus

present at your confirmation. I recall my own with exceptional clarity. Chichester, not the loveliest of our great cathedrals - squat and ugly as a toad if the truth be out - but holy in my memory. The service took place on one of those afternoons that occur only in the past. Sunlight kissed the altar-table, the chalices, patens and candlesticks, the bishop's mitre and our young neophyte heads with a golden rim-light calculated to cause the sternest atheist among us to whinny with unconditional faith.

Utter balls, naturally. The only thing gleaming with light that afternoon was the dew-drop depending from the bish's nose.

There is no doubt, whatever one's perspective on these matters, that the numen created by a gather­ing-together of people united in one common spir­itual cause is as palpable as the ground they kneel upon. Whether this is truer in an Anglican cathe­dral than in a Buddhist temple or a front-parlour seance of crackpot spiritualists is not within my province to say. I am pleased, however, that you are getting something out of old Tom Eliot, whom I did indeed know. He published me at Faber and Faber when I was starting out. Said some rather nice things about me - then again, towards the end, he said nice things about a whole fleet of talentless ninnies, none of whom you would have heard of, nor ever





Unknown





57


Stephen Fry

will hear of again. There was a man called Botterill he was absolutely sold on. Who reads Botterill today? Why, even fewer people than read me, and that is saying something.

However, that is neither here nor there. I wanted to say, principally, how impressed I was by the senti­ments expressed with such courage and conviction in your letter. My only other godchild is your cousin Jane, and as you know, I am not on speakers with that side of your family, so I count myself very lucky in having an intelligent and interesting godchild with whom it is a pleasure to correspond. It'll be your holidays soon, I suppose. It would be a great treat if we could get together and see if between us we can't get to the bottom of this business of art and life. I wonder if it would be possible for me to come over some time in the summer and stay at the Hall? We would be able to read, think, talk, sip cordials and pick daisies together, or as Burns prefers, we can 'pluck the go wans fine'. My own son (you remember Roman?) will be with his respective and disrespectful mother over most of the summer holi­day so I shall be alone and in sore need of some intellectual and spiritual stimulus.

Outrageous. Ted, you fucker, is this what you've come to? Cadging country-house visits off your godchildren? Admit it, you sad old bugger, the only 'intellectual and spiritual stimulus' you were ever in need of was a quick





Unknown





58


The Hippopotamus

shag in the shrubbery with a domestic. I did need a way in to Swafford, however, if I was to earn my lovely lovely money. It was also possible that the company of a moon­ing romantic might disgust me enough to egg on some new and crunchy verse of my own.

So why not mention the idea to your parents, old lad, and see what they think? It's been an age since IVe seen you and, dissipated and disgraceful as I may be, my promises at the font do mean some­thing to me. Perhaps your youth will inspire me to write poetry again. I find that time and age have corrupted my powers and that, as your favourite poet observes, 'the vision splendid' does indeed 'fade into the common light of day'.

Whither is fled the visionary gleam? Where is it now, the glory and the dream?

P-U! I had to leap up and pace the room whistling and humming and kicking the wainscoting to take the taste of that one away.

So, here's looking forward to a summer of discovery and amusement,

Your affectionate godfather

Ted





Unknown





59


Stephen Fry

Oh, you howling old hypocrite, what a beast you are, what a dread cruel beast. What a great, slavering, wicked and contemptible monster. How can you hold up your head? How can you look yourself in the face? How can you sleep? You horrible, horrible man.

Dear Uncle Ted,

Your letter made me dance. Mummy or Daddy will be in touch soon. I hope you can stay at least a whole month1.

. . . neither evil tongues, Rash judgments, nor the sneers of selfish men, Nor greetings where no kindness is, nor all The dreary intercourse of daily life, Shall e'er prevail against us, or disturb Our cheerful faith that all which we behold Is full of blessings.

Counting the days,

Love

David XXX





Unknown





60


The Hippopotamus

II

Swafford Hall

Swafford

Norfolk

Sunday 19th July 1992

Dear Jane,

Your first report, as promised, from within the walls of Troy. My letter to your cousin and god-brother, if there is such a thing, worked like a charm. Little Davey all but sent me his pocket-money to cover my train fare, so keen was he for me to come. Unless I poo things up horribly, Fm here for as long as I behave myself.

Liverpool Street Station has been turned into a sinister and unacceptable mixture of an Edwardian amusement pier and a daytime television studio since last I looked. Absolutely disgusting. Since your cheque seems inexplicably to have been honoured, I travelled First Class. There's only one smoking car on the whole train as far as I can see. In Britrail's futile attempts to ape airlines (in itself a deranged project - about as sensible as going into a barber­shop and asking for a Lindsay Anderson cut) they litter the compartment with a laughable in-carriage glossy called 'Executive' or Top Traveller' or some





Unknown





61


Stephen Fry

such pukey garbage. Thank Jesus I'll soon be dead. Sorry that sounds a little callous in the light of your illness. You know what I mean.

Anyway after an hour and a half's worth of scenery had streaked past my window, the train banged to a testicle-strangling halt at Diss Station and collapsed the little pyramid of Johnny Walker miniatures I had been constructing on the table in front of me. I saw a youth on the platform, tossing and catching a bunch of carkeys like a gangster with a silver dollar. A glossy black spaniel sat by his side exposing its tongue to the air as is the custom of such creatures. The bungling manner with which I attempted to pull my suitcase widthways through a narrow compartment doorway must have told him who I was. It is unlikely he would have remem­bered me from four years ago, the last time I infested Swafford.

'Hello, sir/ he said, taking the case and deftly twisting it free. Tm Simon Logan. Welcome to Norfolk/

'Good man. Ted Wallace/

This is Soda. My spaniel.'

'It's an enormous pleasure, Soda,' I said, drop­ping a forefinger on to the animal's muzzle by way of greeting.

Simon led me to the exit.

'David wanted to come too, but I thought you'd enjoy the two-seater.'





Unknown





62


The Hippopotamus

A two-tone Austin-Healey stood in the car-park, ice-blue over ivory. A Rank Starlet car, I thought to myself, sort of thing Diana Dors would be photographed in, tossing back her scarfed head with a gleam of teeth and a glitter of winged sun-glasses. You're probably too young to remember Diana Dors, but I put this in at no extra charge. I had been hoping for Michael's well-stocked Rolls-Royce, of course, but the boy was clearly pleased with this machine, so I clucked appropriately.

1 left the roof and window pieces at home to leave room in the boot for your luggage. So long as it doesn't rain, eh?'

I looked up at a huge East Anglian sky, innocent of clouds and blue as . . . my poetic powers have been sucked clean of simile. I can't think what it was as blue as. As blue as blue. As blue as the Virgin's panties. As blue as it was.

Once the town of Diss was behind us, the Austin's engine note and the unmarked lanes created the pleasing illusion of a mild and dusty Dornford Yates England. One half-expected to see horses rearing in shock at the unaccustomed sight of an automobile and slack-jawed villagers nudging one another in wonder. In fact we saw no one. A sheet of stillness lay over everything and we ripped through it like a speedboat across a lake. You probably haven't heard of Dornford Yates either, but there you go.

In the rush of air my forelock flapped in my face





Unknown





63


Stephen Fry

as I looked right and left, stinging my eyes. Simon, whose hair is unfashionably short, looked straight ahead, every concentrated second at the wheel sustaining him in something close to orgasm. I judged him seventeen and only newly licensed. He is the kind of boy who would take his driving test the morning of his birthday and find excuses to drive twenty miles to buy a box of matches. Soda was wedged happily behind us, the tip of her tongue whipped back by the wind till it met the base of her ears.

A silver gleam caught my attention in the distance, across a haze of fields whose crops were just on the turn from green to gold.

'What's that?' I bellowed.

Simon cocked his head.

I stabbed a finger and yelled. There! Shiny thing, like a church/

'Oh, that. Silo/

'What?'

Tor grain. Cheaper to build that than reroof an old barn. Better storage/

'Ugly bugger.'

I noticed too that the country seemed, Noel Coward jokes about Norfolk aside, flatter than I remembered it. This wasn't possible, but there was no doubting the increase in width and depth of view. It was the hedgerows of course, or rather the absence of them. It must have been twenty years





Unknown





64


The Hippopotamus

ago that they had started to pull them down, but my old man's memory still expected them. In the same way, if Westminster council decided overnight to allow traffic in Piccadilly to flow in both direc­tions I would probably never notice, because I always think of Piccadilly as a two-way street, for all that it must be decades since they buggered it up. Now, here in East Anglia, what with the denuded fields and those great giant's bolsters encased in bin-liner that serve the office of straw-bales and these new and nasty aluminium silos, the landscape resembles something frankly American - you know those great wheat fields in Iowa where, line abreast, massed combine-harvesters roll over the horizon like Panzer divisions? I am a city pigeon of course, needing hard paving-stones beneath my feet and air I can bite, but rural England, for all that, has its place in my heart and I don't like the idea of hooligans arsing around with it.

Simon was amused.

'Got to think of the yield,' he shouted and then - the aggressive cry of despoiling landowners every­where - 'you want to eat, don't you?'

But hedges are still thickly planted, I noticed, around the approaches to Swafford Hall. There's nothing quite so enlivening to an unregenerate snob such as myself as the sight from a car of flashing parkland trees half-obscuring and half-revealing the chimneys, windows and columns of a great house,





Unknown





65


Stephen Fry

like a stripper teasing with a veil. We ate up the lime avenue and the full vulgar glory of the place swung, as L. P. Hartley would say into view, and then I saw with a stab of regret and self-reproach that there was a boy sitting half-way up the baroque steps that poured from the front portico like a thick stream of molten lava. He stood and shaded his eyes in our direction.

I had deferred any thoughts of how I was going to shake off this wretched child. He had served his purpose by getting me invited here; the last thing I wanted was to trail about the place coping with pretentious adolescent drippery or, worse, being forced to listen to myself dole out my own dime-store apothegms. The answer, perhaps, would be to set him a task of some kind, to devise a devilish assignment that would keep him out of my hair. 'Write me something extensive in terza rima,' I pictured myself saying. 'If you're going to be a poet, you must learn to master the forms.'

Simon blew up a cloud of grit and gravel in a sharp and senseless sweeping handbrake turn in front of the house. David came down the steps blinking dust from his eyes.

'Hello, Uncle Edward,' he said, smiling and blush­ing.

He is a comely boy indeed. Never having had any relish for my own gender, such coltish charms increased my blood pressure by not a bar - indeed





Unknown





66


The Hippopotamus

I consider his looks a little ridiculous in a male -but I can think of any number of writers and artists of my acquaintance who at the very sight of him would swoon and moan and clutch at a passing vodka for support. Simon is handsome in a colour­less way like an old photographic portrait. He is respectably growing out of his spots and into a conventional English - or in his case of course, half-English - manhood. David's complexion, however, is quite astonishingly clear; in all my life I have not seen skin so wholly without blemish. There is some­thing a little freakish there, I think. I assume you know him better than I do? At all events, his down­cast eyes and crimson cheeks speak of a virginal modesty rare in the young today. He bids fair to be fully the kind of prig his letters have threatened.

'Davey, you young hound, well met/ said I, heav­ing my corse from the car.

What is nowadays almost universally called, with mock inverted snobbery, a 'real live butler' was stand­ing at the threshold.

Ah, Podmore, is it not?' I flapped a hand in his direction after a moment's concentrated hesitation, a hesitation designed to show me sifting my memory, recalling and discarding the names of at least twenty other butlers with whom I was on familiar terms. Comes easily to you, my dear, but we Bohemians have got to strive for the effect of insouciance.

'Good afternoon, Mr Wallace. Nice to see you





Unknown





67


Stephen Fry

again, sir.' Not that he was fooled for a minute, I dare say.

David had taken my suitcase from the boot of the Austin with a proprietorial air that told the world that I was, certainly as far as he was concerned, his guest. Simon waved over his shoulder and launched the car, with a crunching spin of the back wheels, away on some other errand.

Well, well. Here I was. How long I would stay depended, I supposed, on the kind of reception Michael gave me. Your idea of telling him that I would like to write a biography is all very well, but.

The fact is, and I didn't tell you this earlier, Jane, but I know for certain that at least two fairly pres­tigious hacks have tried before now to biograph Michael Logan with little success. Swafford Hall is known in journalistic circles as the Writs Hotel.

I'm not saying it won't work - after all Michael trusts me, trusts me rather as Guy Burgess was trusted, in the belief that anyone of such naked indis­cretion and unreliability must be loyal and true -but I feel you should know that some other approach may prove necessary in the end. Nous verrons ce que nous verrons.

David had reached the top of the steps, the weight of the case listing his slight frame.

It's all right, Mr Podmore,' he said. Til show Uncle Edward his room.' Mister Podmore? Disquietingly bourgeois.





Unknown





68


The Hippopotamus

'Had I better punch in with the parentals before we go any further?' I wondered, sensing the prospect of the long terrace tea that melts seamlessly into veranda cocktails, on which I had set my heart, recede into the distance.

'Mummy's shopping in Norwich this afternoon/ came the happy reply. And Daddy's in London. This way'

I forbore to ask when Michael was expected back. The trick of being a good guest is never to ask any questions about the composition of the household. Hosts, even the grandest, are nervous creatures and interpret curiosity as evidence of dissatisfaction.

'Perfect,' I said, lumbering up the steps.

David had at least, in bagging the Landseer Room for me, swung me first-class accommodation. Have you ever stayed there? The room is huge, comfort­ably bedded, well supplied with Chippendale and Hepplewhite and generous of view. Of particular interest to me, for I am a man who loves his tub, there is a connecting bathroom stuffed to a level of Babylonian profligacy with costly oils and unguents and whose shower and bath are equipped with taps which can be operated from a console beside the bed. Only Michael Logan could be potty enough to employ servants who have nothing better to do than fill baths and then go to the expense of fitting machinery which can do their job for them. The curtains at least are operated manually, which is a





Unknown





69


Stephen Fry

great blessing, there being few pleasures in life higher than that of waking to the sound of a housemaid swishing in the daylight.

There is a price to pay for everything however, and in the case of the Landseer Room the reckoning comes in the form of the preposterous painting that hangs over the fireplace. This disgraceful quarter-acre waste of canvas depicts a spaniel of some kind straining alert and proud on a high castle rampart which gives over a vast Speyside strath or glen or whatever they call valleys in Scotland these days. The work is enti­tled, if you have a bucket handy Lord of All He Surveys. There are other bedrooms, I know, which offer more acceptable art, including a passable Deathwish of the Cumaean Sybil and a more or less juicy Zeus Ravishing Europa with Dryad and Nymph Standing By in Antic Pose, but none has the style and comfort of this room, so I am prepared to let the spaniel pass for the sake of the fragrant bathing and amiable views. One of the things I shall have to ask Michael is whether he buys his art by the hundredweight or whether he uses his eye. I am at least denied the unspeakable horros of the Hobhouse Room, whose dread For Found Is the Lamb that Once Was Lost can provoke nightmares and bucking hyste­ria in all but the most iron-willed. You ever met Oliver Mills? An old crony of your father and me. Screechingest of screeching queens, a depriested director of films and television - you must know





Unknown





70


The Hippopotamus

Oliver. Anyway he was once found skittering up and down the corridor outside the Hob-house Room wrapped in an eiderdown and wailing, 'Lead me to a garret, a servant's hovel, a kennel, a Forte hotel, anything}' Naturally, Muggins had to swap rooms with him.

But the lordly spaniel surveying his domain (or should that be demesne?) I can take, especially since the other lordly spaniel, David, had sweetly taken a lot of trouble to cater for my every whim.

'Ah!' I said, sighting the drinks table. 'Everything is as it should be.'

David followed my eye to the tall, green, glit­tering forest set in its twinkling crystal sea. 'It is whisky you like, isn't it, Uncle Edward?'

'Before we go any further, old darling,' I said, 'shall we dispense with the Uncle? Ted will do, just plain Ted.'

'Right,' said David. 'Ted. As in Heath.'

'A boy of your age has heard of Ted Heath?'

David was startled. 'He was the Prime Minister, wasn't he?'

'Oh, that Ted Heath. Thought you meant the band leader.'

'Band leader?'

Christ, I abominate children. And Christ, I abom­inate my receding memory.

'Well, Davey,' I said, 'think I'll . . . ah . . . take a bath and conceivably a short nap.'





Unknown





71


Stephen Fry

'Oh . . . right.' He hid his disappointment well. 'Absolutely. You know where everything is?'

'Rather.'

He backed to the door. 'I'll . . . when you come down . . . there's the South Lawn which is . . .' he pointed to the wall behind the bed, '. . . that way. I'll probably be hanging about round there if you want to . . . you know. Chat.'

I felt a bit of a swine.

'Davey,' I said, looking at him straight. 'It's simply wonderful to be here. We're going to have a splen­did time. Thank you for asking me.'

His face lit up. 'Thank you for coming. There is so much . . .' He paused, shook his head and left the room, closing the door behind him.

Sleek and soft from patchouli oil and glowing with good malt, I sat an hour later, a sheet of Swafford Hall writing-paper in front of me and the view across the lawns and parkland beyond. I would concentrate on the drudgery of writing this letter to you later, but for the moment there was no reason not to tickle the Muse's tits and see if she mightn't start to express. It was unlikely a poem would come in such peaceful circumstances, but you certainly won't get if you don't ask. I listed, as is my custom, such few words as my mood and the scene suggested.





Unknown





72


The Hippopotamus

Held

Surface

Gaumy

Suspension

Ataractic

Gross

Weight

Mollify

Burst

This

Spread

Suzerainty

Piss-gold

Widened

Hotter

I examined this list for some quarter of an hour. The rare words often annoy the punter, but they never think, they never stop to think about a poet's life. A painter has oils, acrylics and pastels, turpen­tine, linseed, canvas, sable and hog's hair. When did you last employ such things routinely? To oil a cricket bat or mascara an eyelid, perhaps. Come to think of it, you've probably never oiled a cricket bat in your life, but you know what I mean. And musicians: a musician has entire machines of wood, brass, gut and carbon fibre; he has augmented sevenths, accidentals, Dorian modes and twelve-note rows. When did you ever use an augmented





Unknown





73


Stephen Fry

seventh as a way of getting back at your boyfriend or a bassoon obbligato to order pizza? Never. Never, never, never. The poet, though. Oh, yes, the poor poet: pity the poor bloody poet. The poet has no reserved materials, no unique modes. He has noth­ing but words, the same tools that the whole cursed world uses to ask the way to the nearest lavatory, or with which they patter out excuses for the clumsy betrayals and shiftless evasions of their ordinary lives; the poet has nothing but the same, self-same, words that daily in a million shapes and phrases curse, pray, abuse, flatter and mislead. The poor bloody poet can no longer say 'ope' for 'open', or 'swain' for 'youth', he is expected to construct new poems out of the plastic and Styrofoam garbage that litters the twentieth-century linguistic floor, to make fresh art from the used verbal condoms of social inter­course. Is it any wonder that, from time to time, we take refuge in 'gellies' and 'ataractic' and 'watchet'? Innocent words, virgin words, words uncontaminated and unviolated, the very mastery of which announces us to possess a relationship with language akin to that of the sculptor with his marble or the composer with his staves. Not that anyone is ever impressed, of course. They only moan about the 'impenetra­bility' or congratulate themselves for being hep to the ellipsis, opacity and allusion that they believe deepens and enriches the work. It's a bastard profes­sion, believe me.





Unknown





74


The Hippopotamus

Well, well ... I can make any number of excuses, but I suppose the real truth is that the energy has gone out of me, has been weeping from me for ten years. Too many appearances on The Late Show' and Melvyn Bragg, too many easy offers to anthol-ogise and edit, too much regard and petting, and lately, far too much of the old electric soup. I crossed out the list of words, scrawled 'FUSTIAN!' in angry letters across the page and stored the sheet of paper in the desk. I would have screwed it up and tossed it away were it not that a deranged university in Texas has paid me for the rights to all my papers.

Tapers?' I had asked when approached by their Professor of Modern Poetry. 'What do you mean papers?'

'Hell, you know . . . notebooks, drafts, corre­spondence . . . papers/

What kind of self-conscious and insufferably twee belle-lettriste ponce keeps notebooks? I asked myself. Utterly absurd, but the money was good, so I sat down one weekend and forged dozens of likely-looking rough drafts of my better-known poems. It was the greatest lark alive, scrawling indecipherable Greek in the margin, writing 'but Skelton????', 'mild und leise wie er Idchelf, 'see Reitlinger's Economics of Taste Vol. II, page 136' and 'No, no, no, no, no, no! Close the field, close the field!!!' in different-coloured inks across the pages. At one point I wrote 'posterity can suck my cock' in pencil and then





Unknown





75


Stephen Fry

erased it. It took less than four years for an American graduate to uncover this and write to me asking what I had meant by it. She came over to England three months later on a research fellowship and found out.

Forgive me for rambling, my dear, but you've no idea what a relief it is to get all this off my chest. Besides, since you haven't told me what to look for, I've nothing else to write about yet.

Anyway, despairing of poetry, I was pouring myself another glass of scotch when the telephone next to my bed rang. Ted, it's Anne.' 'My love!'

'Quite. Settled comfortably in?' 'Snugger than a bugger in a rugger scrum.' 'Then come downstairs, I want to talk to you.' She was in one of the south-facing drawing rooms, looking out of the window. She turned at the sound of creaking floorboard and favoured me with a welcoming smile.

'Ted, it's actually tremendous to see you.' I joined her at the window, kissing each cheek and then stepping back to examine her. A taking little creature she has always been; fair hair, good cheekbones, eyes as blue as et cetera. I don't know how much you know about her, she's only your aunt by marriage, so I'll fill in a little for you. She had met Logan while he and I were still





Unknown





76


The Hippopotamus

clumping around in uniform. He hadn't a button in those days and she was the daughter of a bust and useless earl. While engaged on some footling divisional exercise in the Thetford Chase area, Michael and I, as the only subalterns in our distinctly shabby regiment who didn't say 'pardon' or hold our knives like pencils, had been taken by the CO for dinner at Swafford Hall, then a mouldering heap so cold that your breath stood out in the drawing room and the women's nipples peaked like bakelite studs. Anne was eleven years old at that time and had been pressed into the traditional child's service of handing out olives and smiling sweetly at the guests before being packed off to bed. I hadn't noticed her much, except to see that she had dog hairs on the back of a rather plain velvet dress.

In the car on the way back, with the CO nuzzled against his shoulder in a rumbling stupor, Michael had turned to me.

Tedward,' he whispered, 'some day I'm going to marry that girl and buy that house.'

'Not before I've been made Poet Laureate,' I had said.

'It's a deal.'

The driver turned round and winked. 'And I'll be leader of the Labour Party,' he said.

'Shut up, Corporal,' we snapped in chorus, 'and watch the road.'





Unknown





77


Stephen Fry

The CO had woken up and puked fiercely all over Michael's mess-jacket.

What happened to that driver I have no idea. For all I know he did become leader of the Labour Party. I never took much of an interest in these things. It is a certain truth that they didn't make me Poet Laureate and that they wouldn't if I were the only British poet left alive, which, as a matter of fact, I happen to believe I am. Michael left the army, with me, the moment our two years were up. Ten years later he had married Lady Anne and within another two the noble father-in-law's embolism burst and Michael bought Swafford off Alec, the new Lord Bressingham, a sneaky young tyke who looked a cross between Bryan Forbes and Laurence Harvey and was only too pleased to fold the cash in his lizard-skin wallet and skip to a flat in Berkeley Square. It was a kinky little caprice of fate, all of a piece with Logan's guiding star, that Alec Bressingham then spent the next five years giving that money right back in the form of gambling chips at the string of casinos that Michael then ran in Mayfair. Alec even contrived to shoot himself in a Logan-owned hotel. Anne hadn't worried too much, the lad was only the remotest kind of cousin and she had always suspected him of anti-Semitism, a taint she could smell anywhere, like so many who marry into the tribe. She acquitted me of the vice, however, probably because I was so brazen in hail-





Unknown





78


The Hippopotamus

ing Michael as 'you °W Jew*. She is usually pleased to see me, so long as I behave myself.

I finished my inspection of her.

'And it's just as tremendous to see you, Annie/ I replied. 'You're looking younger. Lost some of that fat.'

'Michael's in town. Hopes to make it down for next week. Sends you a punch in the belly'

I noticed she had half an eye still on the window. I followed the direction of her gaze. The South Lawn, as I assume you know, slopes down to a lake, in front of which, on rising ground, stands a miniature version of the Villa Rotunda, built as a kind of summerhouse. Anne saw me watching her, shrugged and smiled.

'David's in there,' she said. 'Ted, I think it's simply the best thing that you've come.'

'Ah,' I said, non-committally.

'I'm so worried about him. I ought to tell you . . . it's a little strange . . .'

She broke off. Simon was standing in the door­way.

'Mother, I'm going off to Wymondham to see Robbie. That okay?'

'Yes, darling.'

'I might stay the night.'

'Fine, fine. Make sure you tell Podmore you won't be in to dinner . . .'

He nodded and left. Anne sat down.





Unknown





79


Stephen Fry

Army I understand?' I said, joining her on the sofa.

She seemed confused. Army? What army?'

I pointed to the door. 'Simon.'

'Oh. Yes. Yes, that's right.'

'Seems mad/ I said, waffling on to give her a chance to unburden herself of whatever it was she wished to unburden herself. 'I only went in because they would have hurled me in the slammer if I'd refused. The idea of someone actually wanting to sign up when it isn't compulsory ... done his Wosbie, has he?'

'No . . . it's not Wosbie any more. It's the . . . the RCB, or some such.'

'Yes,' I growled affably, quite content to play the part of the trumpeting old war-horse. 'Quite. “The Professionals”, they call themselves these days. An ability to keep the port decanter from touching the table as it goes around is not enough. You have to be able to speak Cantonese, strip a tank-engine, lead a discussion group on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and know your men's Christian names.'

'Ted,' she said at last, a pleading note in her voice, 'you're a poet. An artist. I know you like to ... to make fun of yourself, but that's what you are.'

'That's what I am.'

'I've never understood much of your work, but then of course one isn't supposed to, is one?'

'Well . . .'





Unknown





80


The Hippopotamus

'But I do know that you must think a great deal about . . . about, oh I don't know . . . ideas'

A young poet once said to Mallarme, “I had the most marvellous idea for a poem this afternoon.” “Oh dear,” said Mallarme, “what a pity.” “What do you mean?” said the young poet, stung. “Well,” said Mallarme, “poems aren't made of ideas, are they? They're made of words.”'

'Oh, do be serious, Ted, just for once. Please.'

I had thought I was being serious, but I duly switched on a pensive expression and leaned forward.

'We're all rather concerned that David is turning out oddly'

'Oh yes?'

'It's nothing,' Anne put her hands to her cheeks like a flushed maiden, 'it's nothing you can put your finger on. He's an absolute dear. Terribly kind, ter­ribly thoughtful. Everyone thinks him perfectly sweet. He's never in trouble at school. He just does­n't seem to be quite ... of this world.'

'Daydreamer.'

'Well, that's not quite it. I think he's not . . . connected to us. Does that make sense?'

'It's an age when privacy counts, you know.'

'At a dinner party last weekend he said in a very clear voice to the wife of our local MP, “Which animal do you think has the longest penis?” She gave a hysterical laugh and snapped the stem of her





Unknown





81


Stephen Fry

wine glass. But he persisted. “No, which do you think? Which animal?” At last, out of desperation, she suggested the blue whale. “No,” he said. “The male rabbit-flea. The erect penis of the male rabbit-flea is two-thirds the length of its body. Don't you think that's the most marvellous thing?” Then he saw we were all staring at him and he flushed scar­let and said: “You'll have to forgive me. I'm not very good at conversation.” I mean. Ted. Wouldn't you call that extraordinary?'

'Certainly,' I said. 'I mean, poor female rabbit-flea. I trust she has been blessed with accommodation elastic enough for such a frantic attachment. But in truth,' I added hastily, for I saw this was not the answer she required, 'David is fifteen. Fifteen-year-olds are always odd. They like to rattle the cage, to tug on the leash, to find their . . . their space, I believe the expression is.'

'You'll know what I mean when you've spent any time with him. So distant, so detached. As if he's a visitor here.'

'Well I'm a visitor here,' I said, rising, 'and it's a lovely feeling. But certainly I'll observe him if that's what you want. I expect it'll turn out that he's in love with the gamekeeper's daughter or some such.'

'Hardly. She has a hare-lip.'

'That needn't be a bar to love. There was a whore in Rupert Street had a hare-lip. Gave the most deli­cious . . .'





Unknown





82


The Hippopotamus

I decided to leave the story for another time, bowed a crisp farewell and set my compass for the South Lawn.

David had emerged from the Villa Rotunda and was now on the lawn in front of it, lying on his stom­ach and chewing a plantain stalk.

'Good bath, good nap?' he asked.

'Didn't manage the latter/ I said, lowering myself on to the bottom step of the stone stairs that ran up to the summerhouse.

He looked at me through squinting eyes. The summerhouse suits you/ he said. 'Same noble proportions.'

Cheeky sod.

'You speak truer than you know/ I replied, look­ing over my shoulder at the structure behind. 'John Betjeman's nick-name for me was the Villain Rotunda.'

He smiled dutifully and removed the stalk from his mouth. 'Have you been crying?' he asked.

'Touch of hay-fever. The air is thick with pollen and other unnatural pollutants. My soft-tissues are geared for London you see, with its wholesome sulphur and nutritious nitrogen.'

He nodded. 'I saw you through the window with Mummy.'

'Oh ah.'

'Were you talking about me?'





Unknown





83


Stephen Fry

'What on earth makes you think that?'

'Oh/ he stared down at a money-spider chasing around his finger tips, 'she worries about me.'

'If you were advertising for a mother in the Situations Vacant column of a newspaper and wanted to frame the job description you couldn't come up with a phrase better than “Must be prepared to worry twenty-four hours a day.” It's what mothers do, Davey. And if for ten minutes they stop worrying, that worries them, so they redouble their worry.'

'Well I know that... but she worries more about me than about Simon or the twins. I see it in the way she looks at me.'

'Yes, but the twins have got a nanny, haven't they? And Simon, with the best will in the world, Simon is . . .'

'Simon is what?'

I hesitated to use the words 'ordinary' or 'dull' or even 'unintelligent' which were probably unfair.

'Simon is more conventional, isn't he? You know, head boy, rugger, army, all that. He's . . . safe.'

'Meaning I'm unsafeT

'I bloody well hope so. I'm not having any godchild of mine going about the place being anything other than wild and dangerous.'

David smiled. 'I suppose Mummy told you about the dinner party the other night?'

'Something about a rabbit-flea?'





Unknown





84


The Hippopotamus

'Why are people embarrassed about sexual things?'

Tm not/

'No?'

'Certainly not/ I said, taking out a cigarette.

'You have sex a great deal, don't you? So every­one says.'

'A great deal? Depends what you mean. I take it when I can get it, that's for sure.'

'Simon says he saw you with Mrs Brooke-Cameron once.'

'Did he? Did he indeed? I trust we put on an entertaining show.'

He stood up and brushed the grass from him. 'Shall we go for a walk?'

'Why not? You can cut me a stout ash-plant and tell me the names of the wild flowers.'

We headed towards the lake and copses beyond.

'In my opinion,' he said, 'people are more embar­rassed about love than about sex.'

'Ah. What makes you think that?'

'Well, nobody talks about it, do they?'

'I thought they talked about little else. Every film, every pop song, every television programme. Love, love, love. Make love, not tea. All you need is love. Love is a many-splendoured thing. Love makes the world go to pieces.'

'Well, that's like saying they talk about religion because they say “Christ!” and “Oh my God” a lot.





Unknown





85


Stephen Fry

They mention love, but they don't actually talk about it.'

And I wonder/ I said, 'if you have ever been in love?'

'Oh yes/ said David. 'Since I can remember.'

'Mm.'

We walked on in silence for a while, skirting the lake. The skin of the water was twitching with waterboatmen, dragon-flies and a tangle of skating insects I could not identify. A heavy, meaty smell of water, mud and rot rose from the margins. David was looking all around as he walked, eyes darting in every direction. It wasn't quite as if he was look­ing for anything, I thought. I was reminded instead of a game called Hector's Room I'd played up in Scotland once at the Crawfords' place. You ever played it? You are shown a room for a minute and then you bugger off while everyone else goes in and makes one small adjustment each, they move a lamp, take away a wastepaper-bin, swap a couple of pictures around, introduce a new object, that order of thing. Then you have to go back in and identify as many of the alterations as you can. The Crawfords had first played it in their son Hector's room, hence the name, and the real design, I have always thought, was to show the men and women exactly where each other's bedrooms lay, to facilitate late-night handkerchief-pandkerchief. That's certainly the only benefit I ever got out of it. Anyway, there's a very





Unknown





86


The Hippopotamus

particular expression on the face of a player when he returns to an altered room, a slow smile, and a sweeping, darting gaze, with sudden suspicious but amused whippings-around of the head, as if the furniture and fitments might still be caught in the act of moving. David's manner reminded me quite precisely of that moment in the game.

'I suppose what I meant/ I said, 'was more “Have you ever been in love?” foul phrase though it may be/

David had stopped and was scrutinising fungus at the base of an alder.

'Of course/ he said. 'Ever since I can remember.'

'Hum. Let me be coarser still, Davey. Have you ever been in lust?'

He looked up at me and said slowly, 'Ever since I can remember.'

'Is that right? And have you ever done anything about it?'

He coloured a little, but said fiercely, 'No. Absolutely not.'

'Is there a particular favoured one?'

'Do you remember,' he said, 'that Boxing Day Shoot four years ago, when those cartridges were tampered with and all that confetti flew out?'

'Vividly.'

'Everyone thought it must have been the New Age types that lived in the East Lodge. The ones that made lutes and kept a goat.'





Unknown





87


Stephen Fry

'It was mentioned, I remember.'

'Anyway it wasn't them.'

'No?'

As we wound our way back to the house he told me what he had done. He hasn't sworn me to silence or any such nonsense, but never having been wildly entertained by the pompous ritual of shooting, I have absolutely no intention of telling anyone else anyway. Besides yourself of course. I will, over the weekend, work it up into an amusing anecdote for you and send it separately.

It was only later that evening, while I was chang­ing for dinner, that it occurred to me that he had never answered my last question to him.

Ill

20th July 1992 too damned early

It's Monday now, getting on for seven in the morn­ing and I've spent a great deal of the night writing this letter.

I was in a foul mood after dinner. Nobody stayed up to drink with me and nobody wanted to play cards or do anything fun. I went upstairs and moped in my room.

It's hard to explain such a fit of the sullens. You can try and rationalise it. It may be that I am blue-





Unknown





88


The Hippopotamus

devilled because I feel guilty about abusing the Logans' hospitality: I am, let us be frank, acting as your paid spy. This seems an unlikely explanation for my current state of mind, which I think owes more to Anno Domini.

I lay in the room, under the great baldachin of a tester, chasing the summer-night itches around my body. One little prickle awoke another and another, until I was bucking on my bed like that little girl in the exorcism film. The same thing went on in my mind, mental itches popping like bubbles. Not enough whisky before bed, this was the problem.

At sixty-six I am entering, I thought, the last phase of my active physical life. My body, on the move, resembles in sight and sound nothing so much as a bin-liner full of yoghurt; my ability to concentrate, the only skill aside from egotism that a poet needs, has faded. Marriages have gone phut and profes­sionally I am regarded as a joke. The Right-Wing Poet they call me. Typical arsing impertinence. Just because I don't subscribe to all the mealy-mouthed orthodoxies of the academic cosa nostra, just because I am a sucker for a title and a well-bred air, just because I know the difference between politics and poetics, just because I have some sense of national belonging, just because I think Kipling is a better poet than Pound (a view, incidentally, that even boat-shoe-wearing academics have been coming round to of late), just because, in short, I have my own





Unknown





89


Stephen Fry

brain on my own shoulders, they choose to ignore and belittle me. Fuck 'em. Fuck 'em all. No need to: they're already fucked. But none the less I have this feeling, this feeling I cannot quite be rid of, a feeling that I have, at this period in my life, been turfed off the newspaper for a good reason - no, that's not it, clearly I have been sacked for a good reason - what I mean is that I got myself sacked quite deliberately.

And the daftness of things - that was keeping me awake too. You must have experienced one of those moments when life seems limitlessly absurd? Especially with your current sentence of death hang­ing over you. I find they come most often with me when I am looking from the window of a moving car or train. You catch sight of something perfectly ordinary, such as it might be bluebells nodding on an embankment, or a family picnicking in a lay-by, and suddenly your mind can no longer support the notion of a whole world full of life and objects and fellow-humans. The very idea of a universe appears monstrous and you become unable to participate. What on earth does that tree think it is up to? Why is that heap of gravel sitting there so patiently? What am I doing, staring out of a window? Why are all these molecules of glass hanging together so as to allow me to look through them? The moment passes, of course, and we return to the proper realm of our dull thoughts and our duller newspapers: in





Unknown





90


The Hippopotamus

less than a second we are part of the world again, ready to be irritated into apoplexy by the stupidity of a government minister or lured into caring about some asinine new movement in conceptual art; once again we become a part of the great compost heap. Our absence is so fleeting and our control over it so negligible that an act of will cannot reproduce the experience.

Peter Cambric, whom I knew pretty well in the Seventies, a bit before your time probably, was harried until his death by the story of a hunt he went on in 1964 in South Africa. He bagged a couple of elephants, alone enough to damn him in today's eyes, but managed to pick off a couple of bushmen too, which even back then was considered pushing it somewhat. A hundred years ago one would have been able to round off such an anec­dote with the words, The whole thing was hushed up, of course.' In 1964, though, things got out and Peter's life was made miserable everywhere he went: his name, rather like that of poor Profumo or one of the Watergate band, was for ever linked with this one scandal. The thing of it was that Peter was always a magnificent shot and rumour would have it that he had taken good aim at these natives. This was a little hard to credit, for Cambric came from a progressive family, spoke from his seat in the Lords in the Liberal interest and consistently voted against hanging. The construction put on the affair was that





Unknown





91


Stephen Fry

he had mistaken the Kalahari clicking of the bush-men for the call of an ostrich of some sort. This was enough to allow Cambric entree into the drawing rooms of the mighty but not quite enough to free him of his whiff of impropriety. Anyway - I draw breath - all this has a point, because one Cheltenham Gold Cup day in the mid-Seventies I shared a car back to London with Peter and we sat in the back getting thoroughly nasty on a clutch of freebie bottles of Hine or Martell or whichever cognac house it was that sponsored the race in those days. Cambric confessed to me that he had taken careful and delib­erate aim but that he had an excuse. It seems that one of these strange moments I have described stole over him of a sudden. The whole scene, the veld, the trees, the game, the bearers, the very sky above, all became quite unreal to him. Existence stopped meaning anything. Life itself was no longer of even passing significance; neither his own nor anybody else's. The moment he had loosed off the second bullet, however, he had come to his senses and dropped the rifle, breathing 'Oh my God, oh my God/ as the truth sank in.

'What I experienced, Ted/ he told me, 'was noth­ing short of ecstasy.'

'Ecstasy?'

'I've read a lot of Mother Julian and The Cloud of Unknouring since that day. The mystics. Ecstasy means "standing outside of yourself. From the Greek.'





Unknown





92


The Hippopotamus

'Mm,' I said. 'Yes. You are aware, my old darling, that all this would sound pretty wobbly in court?'

There is a higher law/ said Peter, with the senten­tious gush of the well brandied, and we left it at that.

As I lay there itching, I cursed my own disposi­tion which, when confronted with the hopeless nonsense of things, has always succumbed more to accidie than ecstasy. When push-off comes to shove-off, a man must have a reason to get out of bed in the mornings, something more than the threat of bedsores at any rate.

I threw off the covers and waddled with bare cracking feet to the drinks tray. I stared at the bottles.

'God's cock/ I said to myself 'It's nearly four in the morning. Surely I haven't come to this?'

I stood there staring at those whisky bottles for upwards of an hour. Behind the tall green necks a sliver of light between the curtains whitened and the sound of birds filled the air. Couldn't stop the tears from falling. Petulant tears, frustrated tears, grieving tears, angry tears, maudlin tears, guilty tears ... I didn't know what kind of tears they were. Just tears, idle tears.

Walkies, I thought to myself, grabbing a full bottle and pushing my feet into a pair of shoes. Best go walkies.

Choosing not to risk the complexities of the great





Unknown





93


Stephen Fry

front door, I let myself out through a french window in the drawing room and lingered on the terrace for a while, sniffing the dawn air and trying to convince myself that it was of a superior quality to our own London vapour.

In spite of the evidence of life all around me, the birds as mentioned and the spewing vegetable life of borders, shrubs and trees, I was conscious of an absolute deadness all around. London though, London at half past four in the morning, absolutely zings with life. The blasts of the newspaper vans thundering through empty streets, the hissing micturations of the derelicts, the quick staccato of cheap stiletto clicking down alleys, the rattle of lonely cabs and, in squares and streets, a louder singing of blackbirds and sparrows than the country­side can ever know, all these sounds are animated and given meaning by the quality that all great cities share: an acoustic. Everything rings in town. The rural world is absolutely without resonance, rever­beration or echo, absolutely without the ring of civilisation. Which makes it fine for an occasional repairing lease or weekend excursion, but debars it wholly from suitability as a habitat for man. Country people, of course, think otherwise: if they had their way they would carpet Piccadilly and the Strand with moss and set wisteria creeping up the walls of Buckingham Palace, just to stop any sound from being allowed to ricochet. As with sounds, so with





Unknown





94


The Hippopotamus

ideas. Shout out a thought in the capital one morn­ing and it's printed in the Londoner's Diary in the Standard in time for the West End final edition, screeched over in the Harpo Club that same evening and derided as old hat in the pages of Time Out the following week. Valueless, beyond question, revolt­ing, certainly, but surely indicative of a livelier atmos­phere than obtains in arcadia, where ideas bounce like a punctured tennis ball on a peat-bog.

There is one thing, I concede, that the country­side does very well and that is dew. And the dew it was, as I leant on the terrace balustrade clutch­ing, but not drinking from my whisky bottle, that caught my eye. The wide tract of grass that glides down to a ha-ha, and the rougher grass beyond where the horses sometimes grazed, was, as one might expect and demand, soaked in quantities of pretty and appealing dew. It was a track of darker grass running down the centre of the lawn that drew my attention however, a trail that marked where some­one had recently walked. A gardener, gardener's assis­tant, gamekeeper or indoor servant, even in these unmannerly times, would surely keep to pathways, I reasoned, so who - a quick check of the watch -who from the household would be abroad at three minutes shy of five o'clock?

I followed, drenching a perfectly excellent pair of buckskin brogues as I went. A fig for that, thought I, like a Salvation Army maiden discovering Life in





Unknown





95


Stephen Fry

a Sixties screenplay this is Adventure. I pursued the scuffing spoor of whoever had gone before until I reached the end corner of the lawn where it sloped down to the deep ha-ha. The browner, barer ground here, banked against the sun and starved of irriga­tion, did not take dew, or if it did, soaked it up instantly, and I could see no more tracks to follow.

Unless my mysterious quarry had springs in his heels powerful enough to enable him or her to carry the ha-ha, they must have struck right, towards a dark, dense area of laurels and rhododendrons. I made my way towards it, feeling, by now, rather an arse.

The place, one of those margins that gardeners cannot do anything with, was so thickly planted with sinister shrubbery that I could see no way to enter. I stood at the edge, brandishing the bottle like a mace; and listened. Not a sound came back. The grass at my feet was lusher again here, but bore no traces of human presence. I turned and made my way back to the corner of the lawn, greatly puzzled. Much against my will, I started to think of your word 'miracle'. Don't think me mad, but tell me, my dear, have you witnessed someone . . . my mind rebels violently against any such thought . . . someone flying? Ludicrous, obviously, yet . . . let me know if this squares with what you want me to discover.

I was conscious of a sensation not unlike that





Unknown





96


The Hippopotamus

which overtakes you when investigating a mysteri­ous night-time noise that denies you sleep. You stand on the stairs, heart pounding and mouth open. You proceed to eliminate the obvious: creeper tendrils tapping against the window pane; your dog, wife or child raiding the larder; floorboards creak­ing as the night-storage heater activates itself. None of those fits the noise, so, fighting a rising panic, you begin to consider less likely causes: a mouse in its death-throes; a bat loose in the kitchen; a child's toy left running; the cat accidentally (or deliber­ately) treading on the remote-control unit and rewinding a video cassette, but none of those quite explains the particular sound either and so ... if you are anything like me, you trot hastily upstairs, dive back into bed and cover your face with a pillow, preferring not to know.

I walked back to the edge of the ha-ha and looked over it to the parkland beyond. I could see no sign of footprints there, but perhaps I was at the wrong angle. Feeling like twelve types of dick, I slid down the bank and hauled myself up the steep side of the ha-ha, the full bottle of the ten-year-old my only weapon. Once on the level of the park I walked forward through the thick grass examining it for signs of human passage. Nothing. Not a trace. I looked backwards and saw the clear marks of my own progress. No one could possibly have come this way. I moved forward again and suddenly, with





Unknown





97


Stephen Fry

no warning, my toe stubbed into something hard and metallic. Leaping like a Scottish dancer, I let out a muffled yell. A hideous pain flew to my cold wet toe and a hideous stream of abuse from my cold wet mouth. It was a bucket, half submerged in a large tuft of longer grass, a heavy galvanised bucket.

I hopped there, wincing; my big-toe nail, which has a tendency to grow in, had jammed viciously into the end of the shoe. I uncorked the bottle and raised it to my lips. As the bouquet of the whisky arrived at my nose, I paused.

There was something inexplicably foolish and bathetic about this incident, yet also something intensely disturbing. A line of footprints leading nowhere: a man following them with a bottle of whisky in his hand: the trail ending with the kick­ing of a bucket. I am not, as you know, a fanciful man, Jane. I set no store by providential symbols, only symbols devised by man, yet I would be an arse-hole pig-headed bigot of a rationalist indeed if I failed to ponder this dream-like sequence.

1 cursed and pushed the cork back in without tasting a drop, raised my arm high and let the bottle fall into the bucket with a clang and a crack. Just for the moment, I decided, I would allow myself a little superstition. Why not, while staying here, ease off the sauce a little?

Having renegotiated the ha-ha, I hobbled back to





Unknown





98


The Hippopotamus

the house, slapping my thigh with irritation. With every step away from the ha-ha I grew in self-recrimination. What kind of man throws away a full bottle of ten-year-old malt? Perhaps it was not that I had drunk too much, more that I hadn't drunk enough; certainly I hadn't slept enough: above all I had failed to finish this first letter to you. The further drinking I decided to leave until later in the day, the sleep could be postponed too. But now I've said just about everything there is to be said, most of it inconsequential to a degree, I'm mongrel-bitch tired and my fist cannot form letters any more, so fuck off, my darling, and leave me alone.

Your devoted godfather

Ted

IV

David stared at the ceiling with something like reproach. The dreadful thing was upon him once more. No matter down what reeking gutters or up what transcendent steeples he forced his thoughts, still the blood thickened into that aching fibre and still his cheeks burned with that pounding heat.

'Down!' he panted. 'Down, down, down/ He knew what was about. He knew full well how his balls were packed and straining with seed, how his tubes





Unknown





99


Stephen Fry

and coils forced and swelled with a pressure to unload. For a year at least he had experienced the soggy defeat of waking to the knowledge that the dam had burst unbidden during the night. What his body did in his dreams he could not control or be blamed for, but he would not, could not allow his conscious self to fall victim to this vile poking, pressing ugliness.

Four by the stable clock, fooled into action by the summer light of dawn.

David stood. He shivered as the shameful head of the monster rubbed with frictive drag against his pyjamas, for a wincing second prising open the slit at its head as it stabbed blindly at the fabric before finding the free­dom of the flap and quivering upwards with a stupid prong of victory.

'Stop it, stop itV David breathed. 'Oh, please . . . please . . .'

But nothing would stop it; not cold water, not prayer, not threats, not promises.

David stood by the bed and clutched the beast in fury, choking it.

'You . . . will . . . behave ... V he snarled, shaking it back and forth in anger.

The bastard thing. It won. Great ropes of semen flew from its tip and dropped to the carpet with a flat triumphant patter.

David threw himself on to his bed, sore, savaged and despairing. He sobbed into the pillow and swore that this thing must never happen again.





Unknown





100


The Hippopotamus

After a while, feeling better, he got up and began to dress.

He timed the last five words of his prayer to coincide with the five chimes of the stable clock.

'Good, sweet, true, strong, and PURP.' he breathed.

He hoped that by adding the word 'strong' he would be able to avoid calamities like that of an hour ago. Purity required strength. Where the strength would come from he could not tell. Not from purity surely? That would be what his father called a catch-22. Strength came from within.

Well, he must be going. He loved it here, but it would never do to be . . .

He tightened up in alarm. Footsteps! He could hear them distinctly. Someone shuffling towards him. He heard a cough and a retching noise. Uncle Ted! There couldn't be the least doubt that it was Uncle Ted. What was he doing up so early? He was the kind of man, surely, who never rose before ten at the very least. David kept very still and, although it was pitch black where he was, closed his eyes tightly. Uncle Ted coughed once more and walked away towards, David judged, the laurel bushes.

Then Uncle Ted came back once more and stood right over him, wheezing and tutting and banging his foot so that dirt fell on to David's face. David didn't dare brush the crumbs of soil away. He simply lay in the warm earth and waited. He heard a scrambling and a thudding noise. Was Uncle Ted trying to find his way in? David held his





Unknown





101


Stephen Fry

breath. The sound stopped. There was silence. A wood louse crawled over David's cheek.

Suddenly there was a loud clang, followed by a great roaring and swearing. Uncle Ted was in the park! What on earth was he doing?

'Cunting, godding hell-bitch fuck-arse shite . . .' David heard, and then a small pop and silence. The small pop sounded like a cork being drawn from a bottle. David wondered if he was going mad. The next sound was another clang and then came the sound of scrambling close to him again. David held his breath once more.

At last, grumbling and puffing with annoyance, Uncle Ted turned and stamped away in the direction of the house.

Ten minutes later, the door of hinged turf neatly shut behind him, David crouched in the ha-ha and scanned the house for signs of life. Lowering his gaze, he saw the marks on the lawn and cursed himself.

'Of course!' he whispered. The dew! I really must be more careful/





Unknown





102


4

12a Onslow Terrace

LONDON SW7

Tuesday 21st July 1992

Dear Uncle Ted,

Your letter arrived this morning. I have read it over many times. Firstly because your handwrit­ing is so difficult and I have had trouble with some ambiguous phrases. Secondly because there is much in it that puzzles me for other reasons. On the handwriting front, I spent much time wonder­ing, for instance, what you meant by David's 'codfish chums'. I know that Davey is very much an animal lover, but I found this idea intensely peculiar until I realised that you meant 'coltish charms'. Then again, there is a reference to your­self as a Rotarian which struck me as unlikely. I have now decided that the word is 'Bohemian'. When I came upon the phrase 'let us be frank, I am aching as your pansy', I could only imagine that the whisky had got the better of you. I have since, by tracing out the letters and coming to an understanding of your pen-strokes, come to the





Unknown





103


Stephen Fry

decision that you actually meant to write 'I am acting as your paid spy'.

This leads me on to my main point. Ted, I do not want you to consider yourself a viper in the Logan bosom or a snake in Swafford grass. You made a reference at the very beginning of your letter to the Trojan horse and that is a bad anallegory too. You are an old friend and now a guest of Michael and Anne Logan. You stand godfather to one of their children. There is nothing so strange in your stay­ing with them for a while, surely? Although it is true that it was I who asked you to stay at the Hall and also true that I am paying you to communicate your impressions to me, I have done so in the certain knowledge, certain knowledge that once you have been there for a while you will find that your own instincts as a writer and as a friend of the Logans will keep you there willingly. In fact I am sure that wild horses wouldn't drag you away from the place. You can no more call yourself a paid spy than a serious photo-journalist could call himself a snoop.

You may think that by going along in this busi­ness you are simply humouring the whim of a dying neurotic who is mad enough to pay you handsomely for it. That may be true. For a month now I have gone over and over it in my mind and asked myself whether or not I am imagining things. I went to see a priest some time ago and he told me that it was common for Visions to attend the dying'. I saw a





Unknown





104


The Hippopotamus

psychotherapist who said the same thing in a differ­ent way: The hurt mind plays itself realistic images to mediate between its desires and dreaded reality. On a larger scale, society does the same thing with its cinema and television industries.' Some such stuff. But I know that what I know is what I know and that nothing can ever be the same again. I won't embarrass you by telling you that I now know that God exists, and that God is perfect and as real as this pen I am holding. Have you ever been in a hot country a scorchingly uncomfortably hot place, and then walked into a cool cathedral or temple? Or come in from a bitter, cheek-aching winter day to the warmth of a fire? Imagine such a feeling of relief and welcome and pleasure to the power of ten, the power of twenty, any power you like, and still you haven't come near the sensation of coming into the presence of God.

I said I wouldn't embarrass you, but I probably have. You will say I've only embarrassed myself I expect, but that isn't true. I'll say no more about this for the moment.

I am so grateful that your first letter was so full. I didn't find it 'inconsequential to a degree' at all: absolutely everything you tell me is of interest. I don't even object to your making fun of me in the way that you have been. I suppose you are being rude because you hate me for making you feel like a prostitute or spy. I don't mind in the least, but I





Unknown





105


Stephen Fry

am sorry you have been feeling unhappy and 'blue-devilled'. What a charming expression.

Your story about Peter Cambric interested me greatly. I can't really believe that, if he felt so 'at one' and in a state of 'ecstasy' he would have been able to do something so self-conscious as aim a rifle and then pull a trigger. One of my stranger thera­pists tried to induce a similar state of mind in me, as part of a process that was supposed to heal or cleanse my blood. Her technique had something to do with alpha and theta waves in the brain. These are necessary for Biofeedback which is the popular name for her technique. A group of us would be in a room together, lying on couches, all leukaemics and AIDS patients, and we had to relax totally until our theta and alpha waves were buzzing or radiat­ing or emitting or whatever it is that they do, and then she made us communicate with our bodies.

'See your blood as a crystal stream, absolutely pure and absolutely clear/ she would say. 'See it gently flow and ripple and glide. But look, look deeper into the blood, there is a tangle of weed just below the surface. You think it's out of reach, but it isn't. You can reach, you can reach into the stream. Lean forward and reach into the stream and take the knot of weed, take it in your hands. It is like jelly. The consistency of jelly. Rub it between your fingers. You can press it and rub it between your fingers and feel it dissolve. As it dissolves you can dip your hands into the





Unknown





106


The Hippopotamus

water and allow the dissolved residue to be carried down the stream. All the weed is untangled and dissolved and all its tiny particles now float freely and easily down the stream to be lost in the sea. Now the river is pure and free and clear again.'

All this would go on for hours and cost thou­sands as you can imagine. It works in your head up to a point. But, no matter how relaxed I was, when­ever she told me to rub the jelly between my fingers I would look down at my hands (in my mind, this is) and something in my brain would force the weeds to become hard and fibrous and knotted and insoluble. I would force them to return to jelly, to something like the consistency of overcooked spaghetti, and then I would rub and rub, thinking I had won, but at the heart of the soft spaghetti this demon in my head would force me again to see another tangle of coarse, black fibre. And so it would go on, one part of me willing myself to dissolve the weed, another part of me forcing myself to recognise that the heart of the weed was malig­nant and unbreakable-down. When the session was over, as all the others did, I would smile sweetly at the healer, so as not to hurt her feelings (ridicu­lous when you think how much money she was making out of us) and say that I felt most amaz­ingly at peace, but I knew that the little knot was still there.

I am the only one of that group alive now.





Unknown





107


Stephen Fry

I must rush to catch the post. I want you to get this before Uncle Michael arrives.

Ted, I know I have done the right thing in send­ing you to Swafford. The length of your letter and your current state of mind show me that God, in his extraordinary way has found a means to save both of us together in one action, as it were. You are my 'godfather', the word is not accidental.

Forgive me if all this is, as they say in America, 'too on the nose', but I'm not interested in shirk­ing embarrassment any more. If my younger self could read this letter she could never in a million years believe that I had written it.

Write as soon as you can and as much as you can. If there is any possibility of your borrowing a type-writer or word-processor it would save me eye-strain and headache . . .

Sending love and awaiting news Jane

II

Swafford Friday/Saturday, 24th/25th July

Jane,

Well, as you can see i have reluctantly consented to your request and tracked down a machine. This





Unknown





108


The Hippopotamus

belongs to simon and appears to be quite unused. it does to words what the KRAFT company does to cheese.

apparently i bang the keys too hard, being used to mechanical type-writers. NOR DO I UNDERStand how the bloody shift key works, it either locks the capitals or denies me any at all. STill at least youll be able to read this if I can get simon or davey to show me how the printer is operated.

i enclose with this letter the story of david and the sabotage of the boxing day shoot for your edifi­cation. even if its irrelevant to your needs i thought you might enjoy it.

Your letter, contrary to your expectation, did not embarrass me at all. I dont know who or what you think i am, some sort of Henry wilcox or C. Aubrey Smith figure who goes all pink and stiff at the mention of emotion or faith. I'm a poet for fucks sake, not a treasury official. THE ONLY EMOTION that annoys a poet is cheap emotion, unearned emotion, borrowed emotion, the emotion of wish-fulfilment, emotion that comes from fantasy or guess work and not from the gut. at least that's what it says in the poet's manual.

BUT, pausing only to remark that there is no such word as 'anallegory' much though there should be, i'm not presuming here to judge your emotions. the weird thing (talking of weird you seem to have forgotten the golden rule 'i before e excepting after





Unknown





109


Stephen Fry

c'. You wrote 'beleive' in your letter. Perhaps you knew the right spelling but your subconscious mind couldn't commit itself to producing such a terrify­ing word as 'believe' in its entirety) the weird thing . . . what is the weird thing I was going to say? OH YES, THe weird thing about this word-processing affair is that you cannot go back and cross a word out. with a type-writer you can backspace and cover your errors in x's. It actually seems to be impossible here, one can absolve oneself of all one's sins and nobody will be any the wiser. Except oneself.

Talking of going all pink and stiff at the mention of things there has been a much fuller house this weekend than I expected. I mentioned in my last letter that I thought it rude to ask hosts or host­esses about the composition of a house-party so i was surprised to discover that a girl claiming to be your best friend has been down here since Friday night. Goes under the name of Patricia Hardy smells of cucumber juice and is the cause of much pink-ness and stiffness in the undersigned, presumably you knew she was coming. I hope she's not here to spy on the spy.

I'll come to her and the others later. Where did I leave off last time? Monday morning. Yes. I finished my first letter to you, rolled wearily downstairs to post it in the box in the hall and dozed lightly with my head against a barometer on the wall for five





Unknown





110


The Hippopotamus

minutes before managing to pull myself up the banis­ters, one rail at a time, finally falling on to my bed five minutes short of eight o'clock.

I AWOKE in time for lunch and managed to brazen out Annie's looks of blended astonishment and reproach in the small sitting room beforehand.

'Couldn't sleep. Bed too comfortable, everything too quiet,' I explained, but I could see that she thought I had been sitting up in my room all night quietly boozing myself into a stupor. Since I believe there are few things more transparently undignified in this world than a drinker making an effort to appear sunny and energetic in order to prove to the world that he is innocent of a hangover, I swallowed the insult of her look and declined her offer of a sherry without further protestations of innocence.

I shan't take you through every hour of every day: it's now Saturday and very little occurred on Monday and Tuesday that I judge worthy of notice. Simon was still away and Anne seemed anxious for me to bear David as much company as I could.

'He's very bright, they tell me,' she said. I'm afraid that there's not much stimulus for him in the holi­days. Simon is that much older and has . . . differ­ent interests. As you know I was never exactly bookish either. Michael is wonderful with him, of course, but he's been so busy lately ... do you remember his niece Jane? Jane Swann?'

Ha! Your name had come up for the first time.

Ill

Stephen Fry

You haven't made it plain whether or not your condi­tion is known to the world so I made no mention of it, anxious to see whether news has reached Swafford.

'I should say so/ I replied. 'She's my other godchild.'

'Oh, of course, so she is. Jane was here in June, part of which covered Simon and Davey's exeat after exams, and she and Davey got on like a house on fire. All the more remarkable really because . . .' She broke off in some confusion.

'Because?'

'I'm not sure if you know/ she said, with the kind of upper-class emphasis which would have told me even if I hadn't.

'The leukaemia? Yes, Jane told me.'

'Really? I didn't know you were in touch. The most appalling thing. Jane invited herself here and . . .'

She thought better of saying whatever it was she had in mind to say. She knew about your mother and me, naturally, so perhaps she felt she was being tactful in not going on about your branch of the Logan family.

So you stayed at Swafford in June, did you? Is that when God smote you, or did you go as a result of being smitten? No doubt you'll let me know in your own good time.

(Extraordinary thing about this machine: when

112

The Hippopotamus

you type an apostrophe or inverted comma it can tell whether it should curl to the left or the right. Thus, when typing the dialogue above I would press the same key for quotes and it would automatically 'type it like this*. Damned smart. Fm beginning to see what all the fuss is about.)

The upshot of this conversation is that Davey has had me more or less to himself. He is a quick lad, no question about that, and I think genuinely inter­ested in poetry and art and thought and the life of the mind. As is natural at his age, he believes that poetry's sole function seems to lie in the descrip­tion of nature. Keats, Clare, Wordsworth, selected Browning and Tennyson, that sort of jazz. I deli­cately put him right.

'No, no, no, you chump. You must have heard the expression “the egotistical sublime'? These people aren't writing about dandelions and daisies, they're writing about themselves. Romantic poets are more obsessed with self than the most therapy-addicted Californian you can imagine. ”I wandered lonely as a cloud“, ”My heart aches“, ”My heart leaps up".'

'But they love nature, surely?' We were walking through the park on the way to the village, where I wanted to stock up on Rothies. Michael only provides cigars for his guests. This would be Monday afternoon, three-ish. There was a beagle pup in need of exercise with us. Its function was to double the length of the walk, wee on my buckskins and attempt

113

Stephen Fry

the stylish feat of snapping its jaws shut on darting butterflies.

'Listen, old darling. Nature is the shit we were born in. It's pretty but it isn't art.'

'“Beauty is truth, truth beauty - that is all ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.”'

'Ye-e-s, but if you imagine that beauty is only available out there, you're going to have a grotty young life, you know. Don't imagine that celandine and meadowsweet, ranunculus and clover offer us our only path to truth, beauty and Vedic happiness. John Clare could wander the leas and dells in a loony trance because there were leas and dells to wander in. We have cities and edge-of-town big-shed architecture now. We have television and algae-wrap lymphatic treatments.'

'So we're supposed to write about those, are we?'

Get the 'we', Jane. I was thirty-eight before I dared put 'poet' in my passport and confess membership of the genus irritabile vatum.

'We're not supposed to write about anything.'

'Shelley said that poets are the unacknowledged legislators of the world.'

'Yes, and he would have looked ten kinds of idiot if everyone had agreed with him.'

'What do you mean?'

'Well, poets would then have to have been described as the acknowledged legislators of the world, wouldn't they? And get off their velvet-clad

114

The Hippopotamus

arses and start enacting. That wouldn't have suited him at all.'

'I don't see that that's a very helpful obser­vation.'

'Well, excuse me.'

We walked on in silence for a while, the beagle pup leaping like a dolphin in the sea of long grass.

'Look,' I said, 'I love the fact that you want to be a poet. I adore it. But I cannot, in all conscience, imagine an occupation more ... In fact, let's make a wager. I bet you, David Logan, I bet you that during my stay here you will not be able to name a single profession that has less use, less chance, less future, less point, less status and fewer prospects than the calling of Poet.'

'Sewage engineer,' he replied at once.

'Two scenarios,' I said. 'Scenario A: all the poets in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland go on strike. Result? It would be fourteen years before anyone outside Gordon Square or the offices of the TLS so much as noticed. Hardship, discom­fort and nuisance quotient? Nil. Impact? Nil. Newsworthiness? Nil. Scenario B: all the sewage engineers in London alone go on strike. Result? Turds and tampons flopping out your kitchen tap, your feet squelching in scum and ooze where'er you walk. Typhus, cholera, thirst and catastrophe. Hardship, discomfort, nuisance, impact and news-worthiness quotients? High.'

115

Stephen Fry

'All right, all right, that was a bad one. Um . . . composer then. Classical music composer.'

'Well, closer. Modern composers do have a small audience, I grant you. But most of them, those who don't make the big money - and there is big money to be made even in what they insist on calling “seri­ous” music - fill in time and earn their rent by writ­ing filmscores, advertising jingles and public domain soundtracks, conducting, teaching harmony and counter-point at conservatoires, that kind of thing. If they want to they can play bar piano in the evenings in a nightclub. A poet, though, what cabaret skills has he got? He has an even smaller audience, his work is almost exclusively confined, after all, to those who speak the same language: if he wants another job his only choices involve other people's poetry. He reviews. My God, how he reviews. In every newspaper, periodical, quarterly and maga­zine you can think of, he earns his daily Hovis reviewing other people's poetry. Or he teaches. Unlike the composer he doesn't teach the skills of his craft, he doesn't teach prosody and metre and form, he teaches other people's poetry. If he's a big cheese, he can edit the poetry list of one of the few remaining publishing houses that runs such a thing. He'll be publishing other people's poetry and anthologising other people's poetry. No doubt he can make appearances on “The Late Show”, “Kaleidoscope” and “Critics' Forum” too, talking

116

The Hippopotamus

about other people's poetry. Jesus God, if I had the choice between coming back in this century as a poet or a composer Fd take composer and give half my annual income to charity in gratitude.'

Davey looked rather rattled by this outburst and I instantly felt the worst kind of pig. He thought for a moment, biting his lower lip. 'I know you don't mean all that/ he said. 1 know you're just testing my vocation. I know that there is nothing better to be than a poet and that you know it too.'

By this time we had reached the alleyway that leads into the main street of the village and I realised that a strange and wonderful thing had happened, or rather, a foul and horrid thing had failed to happen. I had spoken for half an hour with a youth who claimed to be a poet and he hadn't so much as hinted that he wanted me to read a single one of his poems. Perhaps this is the miracle, Jane, to which you have alluded . . .

That was Monday afternoon. Tuesday was a quiet day. We took a boat out on the lake and I drank Chablis and, at David's request, read aloud from my Collected Verse. Still no move from him to inflict any of his on me.

He thought 'Lines on the Face of W. H. Auden' was contrived, which I told him was like complain­ing that The Hundred and One Dalmations had a lot of dogs in it. He liked 'Martha, As Seen in a Slit of Light' and 'Ballad of the Workshy Man', but his

117

Stephen Fry

particular favourite, naturally, was 'Where the River Ends', which I hadn't the heart to tell him was in fact inspired by the news that Gregory Corso and Lawrence Ferlinghetti's poetry was being set for school exams. He thought it was an ecological poem, a 'green' poem avant la lettre, about sewage outflow into the sea. Youth's a stuff I'll not endure.

Insanely, as if by the power of hypnosis, I found myself asking whether, since I'd shown him mine, he'd show me his.

He blushed like an overripe peach. 'You don't want to see it really,' he said.

'Well, can you recite any? Truly, I'd love to hear some.'

This from Ted Wallace, mind you, who'd been known to hurl himself into moving traffic at the prospect of verse recitation.

The poem was short, which was good. The poem was sweet, which was good. The poem had form, which was good. The poem was bad, which was bad. The poem was called 'The Green Man', which was unpardonable.

The Green Man

I sucked the earth and sucked it dry Dry earth is dust, powder for the hair I stretched myself and plucked the sky Plucked sky is blue, a blue coat to wear

118

The Hippopotamus

I licked the grass: licked it clean Clean grass is hay; gold hay for the flesh I hugged the leaves; squeezed their green Squeezed sap is blood, and blood must be fresh

I sowed the seed, seed of my own Sown seed is white, white as the breeze Soon will be born, blood of my bone Son of the earth and child of the trees

This man of straw, this god of mud

Blue is his coat, proudly unfurled

The precious green, the green of his blood

Shall bathe us all clean and ransom the world

I did warn you. It's like smelling someone else farts, isn't it? He seems to be recording, in his own grace­ful way, a wank in the woods. In case you're wonder­ing whether I lovingly committed this thing to memory, let me assure you I have copied it out from a painstakingly calligraphed manuscript which Davey presented me as a result of my having been (how could I be otherwise?} complimentary.

So much for Tuesday. Wednesday, however, was of the highest significance for Swafford, since it saw Michael's return from town. We understand he now hopes to stay for some time. He has a kind of telecommunications centre installed in his study where he can toil away stripping assets, defrauding

119

Stephen Fry

pension funds and acquiring whatever it is that big cheeses like your uncle do acquire . . . acquisitions I suppose.

On Wednesday afternoon David and I stood on the leads above the front portico and watched the helicopter land on the South Lawn. Michael clam­bered out, charged forward towards the house clutching his head (clutching his wig if grubby rumour is to be given houseroom. I'll find out about that one day don't you worry) and as soon as he had safely cleared the beating rotorblades, looked up to where we stood. David waved, Logan waved back. I waved, Logan peered then waved and pranced. A welcome. A big bouncing welcome from a big bouncing man.

Down the wooden rungs we streamed, me gasp­ing in David's wake; we clattered along the old nursery passage, tumbling down the back stairs and hurrahing into the hallway to greet him, like Jo and Amy March in the gooiest Sunday after­noon serialisation you can imagine. Your Aunt Anne, coming from the front drawing room, had won by a length and was first to be kissed. Michael, in his wife's arms, looked up as we braked our heels into the marble and skidded to an embar­rassed halt.

'Davey! And Tedward! Ha-ha-haV

My God, you can only envy this man. Not his power and his wealth and his position, though

120

The Hippopotamus

frankly one can envy that too, but his authority and his - well yes, his power in that sense - his power within his family and his power over his family and the great radio beams of pure sodding charisma that he gives out so unsparingly and so unceasingly much as weightlifters and literary editors give off BO.

Compare and contrast:

Last Christmas, Ted is invited to Helen's house, Helen being my second wife and the mother of Leonora and Roman.

Ted, not being a driver, makes landfall on sched­ule, as advised in writing and by fax to the house­hold, at Didcot Station. Anyone there to meet him? In a pig's arse.

So Ted gets a cab to drive him the twelve miles. He arrives, and presses the doorbell with the tip of his plum-pudding nose, for his arms are all laden with presents.

Nobody comes, so Ted pushes and finds that the door swings open. He heads for the drawing room, staggering under the weight of his parcels. He reaches the threshold, cheeks ruddy with festive cheer, eyes twinkling like fairy-lights. Old Ted is the Spirit of Christmas Present, Henry the Eighth in one of his good moods, Friar Tuck and Clarence the Angel all rolled into one beaming bundle. He is Mirth, Jollity, Paternal Love and Yuletide Joy. He is chestnuts roasting on an open fire, he is a curranty wassail of mulling wine and plump mistletoe. His

121

Stephen Fry

florid beam of bonhomie promises games, cheek-pinching, larks, piggy-back rides, jokes and mince­meat merriment.

His ex-wife, his only son, his only daughter, his only daughter's boyfriend and his only ex-wife's new husband look up from the television, where Cilia Black is presenting the Christmas edition of 'Blind Date', and say:

'Shi'

'Oh, it's you.'

'Have you been drinking, Daddy?'

'Hi.'

'God you look awful.'

'Shr

Home - is - the - sailor - home - from - sea -and - the - hunter - home - from - the - hill, I don't fucking think.

This was no more than the kind of loutish, grace­less, lumpen reception ninety-nine fathers out of a hundred are accorded every day of their lives. Nothing new or surprising in that. The only response to such brute behaviour, naturally, is to get so drunk and unpleasant that you do the bastards the favour of justifying their icy welcome and guarantee another just like it next time.

Moment of whining self-pity over, let me proceed. We had left your Uncle Michael (a man who had never in his life entered a room without everyone in it leaping to their feet and either clustering around

122

The Hippopotamus

him like tame gazelles or jumping out of the window in fright) standing in the hall.

'So, Davey ... what do you hear, what do you say?'

The strawberry patch is absolutely bursting. I had a look with Uncle Ted last night.'

'We shall have strawberries for pudding. Yes. A mountain of strawberries. TedwardI' Michael's bruisingest bear-hug. 'I heard.' Outstretched arms, shoulders raised, like Christ crucified.

Suddenly you could see that Christ's stance on the cross was in fact no more than a great middle-European Jewish shrug: Tm being crucified, my mother's at the foot of the cross and she's moan­ing that I'm not wearing a fresh loincloth. Oil', that kind of shrug. The kind gentiles can't do. I took it to refer to my dismissal from the rag.

'Ah, well,' I said (my shrug, I could see in the hall mirror, gave me a sour and petulant dowager's hump), 'it's only a bloody newspaper.'

'Right! Only a newspaper. That's what I said when I sold it in '82. It's only a newspaper. Mind you . . .' He broke off and looked around him.

'So where's Simon?'

Annie had taken his arm. 'Simon has been stay­ing with Robbie. Tractor racing, as you very well know from the fax I sent you. He'll be back tomor­row morning.'

So Annie sends faxes to Michael telling him of the comings and goings of his brood, does she? I

123

Stephen Fry

must say, Jane, that surprised me mightily for I had been there in the drawing room on Monday if you remember, when Simon languidly announced that he was staying away for the night, and Anne had hardly seemed to take it in at all. They say the only skill needed to be a financial genius is grasp of detail. Perhaps it applies to parenthood too, in which case I'm a dead loss, as it's all I can do to remem­ber the genders, ages and names of my two.

Everyone satisfactorily greeted and hugged, Michael hurried upstairs to bath and change out of his financial suit and into the familial polo-shirt and shorts. The knowledge that he was upstairs made Swafford a different house. Hard to explain how altered the atmosphere was. It was as if we had been doing nothing over the last few days but filling in. I'm a few years older than him but he is still capa­ble of making me feel like a four-year-old. All the more stupid of me, therefore, to break the news to him so suddenly on his first evening back.

'You want to do whatT His brows came together to form an expression which could have been either a scowl of thunderous rage or a frown of amused perplexity. In my rather watery fear, I interpreted it as the former.

'Michael, Michael . . . it's not . . .'

'So now you're some kind of hack? Some kind of . . . what is her name? Some kind of dirt-mongering Kitty Kelley? The Private Life of Michael Logan. No,

124

The Hippopotamus

no, worse than that, too tame. The Private Lives of Michael Logan. The Very Private Lives of Michael Logan. Tedward, Tedward. This is terrible.'

Oh shit. Oh shitey-shitey-shit-shit. I spread my hands.

'Michael, old walrus, I knew this would happen. I've gone and explained myself all wrong. It's not you, I'm not interested in you. Not you per se. It's the whole . . . the whole thing!

Tor a poet you have a less than wonderful way with words.'

I leaned back, flustered. The man had been so pleased to see me, so hugely and powerfully delighted. Now I had rushed in and hustled him. We were sitting alone around the dinner table, the covers having been cleared away, Annie having gone into the drawing room and Davey having bedded himself down for the night. There were strawber­ries and cream in us - Michael's words are never lightly spoken - the proper old-fashioned kind of strawberries at that, late fruiting, the kind you can twist the pith out of as easily as pulling a baby carrot from compost, not the modern travesty whose leaves snap off and which taste of stale cider; there was good wine in us too and a mellow cloud of Michael's Havana and my Rothies hanging in the air. I had thought the moment propitious.

'Bloody hell, Michael, you know me,' I said with a winning smile.

125

Stephen Fry

That's what I'm afraid of/ he replied.

'Unworthy of you. I'm not interested in gossip or scandal . . . not that there is any I'm sure, and if there is I don't care. I say biography but I'm thinking as much of a kind of history a kind of outline. You see, Michael/ I leaned forward again, 'I think the two great threads of twentieth-century history are the Anglo-Saxon and the Jewish. It may be that next century it will be the Hispanic and the Arab, or the black and the Asian, or the Venusian and the Martian for all I bloody know, but for the last hundred years' (I was improvising madly here, of course) 'the Jew and the Anglo have more or less defined the entire shape of the globe, of intellec­tual thought, of art, of popular culture, of history, of . . . oh, I don't know ... of mankind's destiny, if you will. Now, it's not uncommon for Jews to marry out of their race, nor uncommon for an Anglo-Saxon to do so. But you and Anne, you see, you make a particularly intriguing, a particularly vivid case-study the outlines stand out. You're not just any Jew, you're maybe the most powerful in Europe. Anne isn't just any Anglo, she's from one of the oldest families in Britain, whose ancestors have ruled, roued and ruinated for over a thousand years. Her mother's connections mean there's a spot of Russell, as in the Prime Minister and as in Bertrand, in the mix, and there's a helping of Marlborough and Churchill too, with a side-salad of Cecils and Pagets.

126

The Hippopotamus

So your family is a union, an interweaving of the two great threads. Perhaps the tradition of Anglo-Saxon and Jewish dominance in the world is over, from Christ to Marx, Einstein, Kafka and Freud, by way of Shakespeare, Lincoln, Franklin, Jefferson and Colonel Sanders. Your offspring, your marriage, your family, it all becomes almost a symbol, doesn't it? Fm not interested in whether youVe been faithful to your wife, Michael, or what dirty deals you may have done in your time. I really think there is a most marvellous book here/

Fer-rankly . . .

Michael stared at me for what seemed a week. Til think about it, Tedward.'

I smiled. That's all I ask/

'You're staying a good long while. There'll be time to discuss later. Let's go join Anne.'

So we left it at that.

Have I done right, Jane? I think he's swallowed my story - why shouldn't he? It's bloody convinc­ing - and I don't think I've queered the pitch for any other developments. But I wish, I wish, Jane, my dearest of dear, dear things, that you would tell me exactly what it is I'm supposed to be looking out for.

Give me time to stretch and pour myself another whisky and then we'll look at Thursday.

127

Stephen Fry

III

Thursday saw what we might call the opening of the house for the summer. When I heard that others were coming, it occurred to me that for Davey I was something in the nature of an advance guard and that the reason he was so especially pleased to have me early was that he could form a prepared alliance against any nasty grown-ups that were coming later and not be relegated to the status of Left-Out Child or Hanger-On. This was a hasty and ill-formed diagnosis, as we shall see.

We had a conversation about people in which we found ourselves pretty much in agreement. I said that I was nervous of meeting anyone new and Davey said he was in much the same case. He remarked that it was hardly surprising we thought the same about things: we were after.all, he explained, to all intents and purposes the same age.

'You've gone all funny on me now, young walnut. What do you mean?'

'Well, I'm fifteen years from the cradle and you must be about fifteen from the tomb.'

Not precisely the kind of words you expect to hear from neatly brushed and polished youth, but he has a point of course, bis pueri series and all that.

The first house-guest to turn up was your chum,

128

The Hippopotamus

Patricia. My lord, Jane, there's a pair of breasts if you like.

She had come on her own, recuperating from a 'devastating' affair with Michael's underling, Martin Rebak. You probably know this. Rebak, CEO of Logan's (it stands for Chief Executive Officer and is a sort of cross between a managing director and a chairman I believe), was her man for a year: there was talk of marriage and eternal love, but then he cruelly upped and tupped a PR girl leaving Patricia simply squelching in misery. Michael rather sport-ingly told this CEO that he was a cunt and a beast and he and Annie have, as it were, officially taken Patricia's side. The CEO's still 'in place' in Simon's words (Simon came back from his tractor racing this morning) and slightly miffed to be the recipient of Logan's old-fashioned Mafia boss disapproval. Whether Michael's sympathy for the beazel springs from a desire in him to sauce her himself, only the Lord and yourself (probably) knows. There are rumours to the effect that Michael is a consistent and conscientious putter-about, but there are rumours about everybody. That the rumours are nearly always correct is neither here nor there for the moment.

Still, what a piece. She doesn't appear to be wear­ing the willow for her lost love, in fact she's brighter than a bag of buttons and merrier than a gallery of

grigs-

'I remember you/ she says to me after bestowing

129

Stephen Fry

a kiss on Podmore, I mean . . . Podmore . . . 'you're Ted Wallace! There was an article about you in the Evening Standard yesterday. You've just been sacked from something, haven't you? A. N. Wilson wrote defending you and Milton Shulman said you were a disgrace to the good name of critics.'

'As Myra Hindley is a disgrace to the good name of child-murderers.'

'And we met twice/ she went on. 'Once at a launch for something, was it a Ned Sherrin theatrical-anecdote book at The Ivy?'

'You won't believe this/ I said, 'but I have missed every one of Ned Sherrin's theatrical-anecdote book launches. It goes against the laws of probability but I've done it. I put it down to rigorous training and self-discipline. The trouble is, you see, if you go to one, you can't stop yourself from going to another, and another, and so on. And before you know it, you're going to one every week. I suppose the only other solution would be for Ned Sherrin to stop writing them, but that would be cheating somehow, wouldn't it?'

'I know! It was at the National Portrait Gallery. Portraits by children, for some charity.'

'Ah, a dim memory is surfacing.'

'There were all these portraits,' Patricia explained to Michael and Anne. 'You know, of Princess Diana and Margaret Thatcher and so on, done by five-year-olds. And Ted said in a loud voice, "Call those paint-

130

The Hippopotamus

ings? Why a modern artist could have done them." And then you made a fuss because you couldn't smoke.'

'Yes, well, not above making an arse of myself, I'd be the first to concede . . .'

'But the first time we met was at a dinner party in 1987 in Pembridge Square.'

She was beginning to sound like one of those 'Embarrassed by Lapses of Memory?' people who advertise on the front page, bottom right-hand corner, of the Telegraph.

'Pembridge Square? Pembridge Square? I don't believe I know anyone who lives in Pembridge Square . . .'

'The Gossett-Paynes.'

'. . . except, of course, for Mark and Candida Gossett-Payne. Well, well, well. Nice to meet you again, Patricia.'

I could see out of the corner of my eye that this is where things were going to get eggy. Davey had slid into the hallway during the latter part of the conversation and was beginning to darkle and glower dangerously. It looked as though he had decided to take against this spirited and charmingly high-breasted creature. He rightly guessed, I suppose, that I would rate her above him as a companion for a walk or boat­ing trip. This is not how things were to be, however.

'Er . . . and of course you must know David,' I said, bringing him forward.

131

Stephen Fry

Her reaction was rather extraordinary, looking back. She moved forward and dropped to her knees . . . hardly necessary since she is only six inches taller than him at most.

'David!' she said, gazing into his eyes. 'I'm Patricia. We met, do you remember . . . ?'

She went into her Mrs Memory routine, while Davey fixed her with a liquid stare.

'My God, but look at you now!' she cooed.' Will you . . . David . . . will you give me a kiss?'

Well, I mean for heaven's sake ... as if he were a toddler or dribbling grandsire. He played up to it very well, I'll give him that: a flirty look from under the lashes and a modestly presented cheek. But stuff my arse with figs if she didn't try and work the head round to a proper lip-to-lip snog . . .

She's your friend, Jane, and I'd give even unto half my collection of bow-ties to prong her where it counts, but I have to say that I'm not quite sure she's balanced.

We all moved into the morning room for coffee, Davey overcoming a marked inclination to simper, while we discussed thoughts for the weekend. Simon trundled in politely: all he got from Patricia was a casual wave of the hand. Twigging to the drift of our conversation he remarked that today was the last day of the East of England Show.

'Really?' said Patricia in a slow drawl that betrayed such contemptuous indifference that Simon went

132

The Hippopotamus

red. She turned to Davey and asked him what he thought of David Mamet.

'East of England Show, eh?' I said to Simon; who was standing there, polishing his toe-cap against his calf. 'Sort of agricultural thing, is it?'

'Well ... oh well, you know . . . I'm sure it's not very interesting to people who aren't. . . very inter­ested in that sort of thing.'

'No?'

'It's very popular here, though. Round here, I mean. In Norfolk and so on.'

'Oh ah. Sheep-dog trials and the like, I suppose?'

'Um, not exactly . . . this is East Anglia, really. Not many sheep.'

'Well, Norwich terrier trials perhaps. Cromer crab racing. Norfolk turkey knobbly-throat competitions.'

'There's rare breeds and there's displays and stalls and some show-jumping and . . . but it's ... as I say, it's not very interesting, I expect/

'You love it, Simon, you know you do,' his mother said. She and Michael had been in private confer­ence in the corner. Bedroom and mealtime arrange­ments, I assume. She turned to me. 'He's absolutely potty about it, you know. Hasn't missed a Show Thursday in years. I'm surprised you aren't on your way there now, darling.'

'No, well I thought I ought to . . . you know, greet our guest and see if anyone else wanted to . . . but it's probably not . . .'

133

Stephen Fry

'Simon, old thing/ I said, 'if you've room, I'd love to come along. That is, if it isn't a bore for you?'

David turned round, startled. Patricia gave me what writers used, inexplicably, to call a 'level' look. Of... what? Scorn? Relief, possibly? Heaven knows. Anne looked pleased and Michael, rather distracted that morning, nodded benignly. Simon, either out of courtesy or genuine feeling, expressed delight.

'No! Not at all. Be a pleasure. We can go in the Austin-Healey if you like. Unless anyone else . . .'

What on earth had possessed me I really cannot say. An agricultural fair ... in blazing July ... in East Anglia. Rare breeds . . . Show-jumping . . . Fat pigs . . . Clay, in all probability, pigeon shooting.

We left straight away, just Simon, Soda and myself. My horror at the prospect of massed farmers aside, I found myself unable to calculate whether I was pleased or piqued to see Patricia and Davey form such an instant bond of apparently mutual devo­tion. Naturally, I've known girlies form attachments to the younger male before now - there's that icky media notion of the toyboy after all - but in the tennis score of the bedroom most girls in my expe­rience would rather Love Thirty or Love Forty than Love Fifteen. Men, of course, are a whole other issue: they start at Love All and stay there until they're dragged from the court.

The East of England Show, I was disturbed to learn, takes place outside Peterborough, on the way

134

The Hippopotamus

to being a two-hour drive from Swafford. My face must have betrayed my misgivings.

'You should have come last month instead/ said Simon. 'Last month was the Royal Norfolk Show. That's only in Costessey half an hour away.' Costessey, it became clear despite its spelling, is pronounced 'Cossy\

Simon then embarked on a story that will be deeply familiar to you, Jane.

'I took my cousin Jane to the Royal Norfolk/ he said. 'Do you know Jane?'

'My god-daughter/ I yelled above the wind-rush.

'Ah. You probably know then that she's not very well.'

I nodded.

'I had thought that perhaps a day out might be good for her. Unfortunately she collapsed during a baling demonstration. Terrible.'

'Terrible/ I agreed.

'I thought she was a goner, I'm afraid. You've never seen anyone so pale. The St John's Ambulance people wanted to take her to the Norfolk and Norwich. That's a hospital.'

'Sounds a reasonable idea. Probably more appro­priate than a restaurant, say, or a football stadium.'

'She came round a bit in the tent, though, and I took her back to Swafford. She didn't want to see a doctor. Just went straight to bed. She was there for a couple of days. Davey read to her every afternoon

135

Stephen Fry

and Dad hired a proper professional nurse. Dad's her uncle/

'She seems quite well now/ I ventured. 'I saw her in London/

Tup, bit of a recovery. I'm not too surprised. You see that with pigs sometimes/

Cousinly affection takes strange forms.

As we drove to Peterborough, I mused on the peculiar pronounciation of Costessey and enter­tained Simon and Soda by improvising a limerick.

There was a young girl from Costessey

Whose pubes were curly and glostessey

Her thighs and her arse

Were smooth as mown grass

And her cunt was dark, dank and mostessey.

'Brilliant!' Simon almost swerved off the road in joy. 'That's absolutely brilliant/

When we arrived at the show ground, he repeated and repeated the limerick to his chums, of which there were many present. The poetic spirit, as you can see, is capable of flourishing in even the most barren and unpromising soil. Simon, for whom poetry is a closed book in a locked cupboard in a high attic in a lonely house in a remote hamlet in a distant land, kept saying to his friends, 'This is Uncle Ted. He's a famous poet. He actually made up a poem in my car as we were driving over!' And

136

The Hippopotamus

then he would recite it. The circumstance of being a 'proper poet' seemed to transform the limerick and confirm upon it something approaching the status of Art.

Reminded me of a trick we used to pull when hard up in the Dominion days. The Dominion was and still is a drinking club just round the corner from the Harpo, probably not your scene, dear. I used to wastrel there in the late Fifties and early Sixties with Gordon Fell, later 'Sir' Gordon, the painter and cultural icon (or so he was described the other week in an article by my daughter Leonora). The ruse was to get Gordon absolutely tanked up on the syrupy Old Fashioneds that he favoured and then start him talking. As soon as he mentioned in the course of conversation someone who wasn't actually a bosom-buddy of anybody in the room - let's use the name Tiny Winters, for instance - we would ask:

Tiny Winters . . . Tiny Winters . . . Remind me, Gordie, who's he?'

And Gordon would splutter out some descrip­tion of who this chap was. We would look puzzled and then firmly shake our heads.

'Nope. Simply can't place him.'

This would enrage Gordon, as well it might, Tiny Winters or whoever being in fact perfectly well known to us. 'You know Tiny! Tiny! Everyone knows Tiny1.' Gordon would hoot indignantly.

137

Stephen Fry

We would appear to struggle with our memories.

'What does he look like?' someone would wonder at last.

'Well he's . . . oh, give us a piece of paper for the Lord's sake . . .'

Tra-la! Victory. Out would come the charcoal and within five minutes we would be possessors of a genuine Fell. Even in those days you could get £50 for the crudest of sketches. The cruder the better, in fact.

'Oh that Tiny! Gotcha. Yes, of course, how is old Tiny then?'

One of us would slip the paper into a pocket and hurl off in a cab round to Cork Street and come back to share the spoils, old Gordon none the wiser.

Of course that shite-arsed little weasel Crompton Day had to go and tell him all about it one after­noon. Next time we tried the scam, Gordon took extra care over his portrait, tongue out, eyes swim­ming in concentration. We were simply panting with pleasure, this looked like seventy-five quid in the bag at least. When he finished we went into our usual 'Ah, now I know who you mean' routine, but before we could slip the portrait off the bar he had picked it up and was starting to tear it into narrow strips before our horrified eyes.

'There you are, dears,' he said, handing out a thin ribbon to every one of us. 'One each.'

Sod. After that you could never get him to draw

138

The Hippopotamus

so much as a map to show you the way to a restaur­ant.

Anyway, my limerick did the rounds of the show, much aggrandised, as I say, by its status of being the work of a known poet. Not that it could be sold like a Fell sketch, of course. Poetry doesn't work like that, oh no. It just shoots straight into the public domain. Still, mustn't mount that weary old hobby­horse again.

You don't really want to hear about The Day I Went to the East of England Show', so I will skip details of the gripping display of synchronised John Deere tractors, spare you the full story of the Suffolk Punch competition and save my descriptions of the titanic struggle between the Dereham and District Beet Growers and the Neane Valley Mangel-Wurzel Breeders (Incorporating the North Cambridgeshire Tap Root Association) for another time.

Simon, paucity of imagination and dullness of wit aside, is at least a civil figure and he never yielded to any temptation to abandon me to the depred­ations of the numerous hat-wearing ladies who skimmed and dipped from tea-tent to tea-tent like dragon-flies in August. In as much as agricultural fairs were a new experience for me, and every man in his sixties should take especial pleasure in any new experience however apparently grotesque, I cannot claim that it was the grisliest afternoon of my life. Simon allowed Soda and me numerous

139

Stephen Fry

pitstops in the beer-tents and sandwicheries and even suggested that we track down a Rothman's bus which he knew would be in attendance. I stocked up on armfuls of free Rothies, filled in a question­naire and charmed the sashes off a couple of the heavily fucused popsies who were staffing the bus, a converted double-decker gaily trimmed in the Rothman's livery of blue, white and gold. Reminded me of my youth when cigarette girls were as common a sight at theatres, cinema premieres and nightclubs as charity-beggars are today. Thing is, the chances were you could shag a ciggie girl in the lawies for a fiver in those days: I've a strong feel­ing that the sticker-vendors of the Save the Children Fund and the bucket-shakers of the Cystic Fibrosis Society would scream for the police and sue you for optical rape if you so much as flicked an eye below the level of their necks in today's caring Britain. There has been a relentless and disturbing rise in moral standards over the years. It worries me.

We left the jamboree at six, trailing many shiny floating balloons that bore the glamorous logos and exotic colourings of cattle-feed suppliers and manu­facturers of slow-release fungicides - it would appear that Michael likes to sit round after dinner and giggle at helium-enhanced voices.

As we drove back, Simon pestered me for more limericks. 'Do one for Swafford/ he insisted.

140

The Hippopotamus

There was an old woman of Swafford

Whose hair was gigantically coiffured

When ashed for the reason

She said In this season

I need all the shade that is offered.'

'Not bad. It wasn't very rude, though, was it?' 'Soda liked it,' I replied, wounded. 'Now do a limerick on me.' 'Hum . . .'

There was a young man named Simon

Who hated the art of rhyming

He thought it a shame

That his very own name

Could only be mated with hymen.

'You're absolutely bloody right, there. Hymen was my nick-name at school. Did you know?'

'Let's call it an inspired guess,' I said.

'Okay, what about one for yourself?'

There was an old lecher named Ted

Who was knoum to be useless in bed

When parting a bush

He'd fumble and push

And screw the poor mattress instead.

141

Stephen Fry

Simon was fascinated by this concept. 'Does that really happen?'

'What, missing the opening, you mean? Certainly. All the time/

Not to have known that, it seemed to me, meant that the boy must either be a virgin or else have been seduced by a woman experienced enough to guide him in without so much as a moment of outslip. Lucky beggar.

The homebound trek from Peterborough, as so often happens, seemed appreciably shorter than the outward haul.

Davey, in a replay of the moment of my arrival on Sunday, was drooping on the front steps.

'Hello, young beast. And where's your girlfriend?'

He turned his head away to disclaim the appel­lation.

'We bear gifts/ I said. 'Look, for you a fat pig fashioned of rarest homespun and with finest kapok stuffed.'

He took it. 'It's rather funny,' he said. 'Thank you.'

'The lady who sold it to me wondered if I had sat for the artist. This was a little rich as she herself favoured nothing so much as a common cormorant or shag struggling in an oil-slick. None the less, I think you will agree there is a more than passing resemblance between this excellent pig and my wise and wicked self. If you were to stick a pin in it I should leap and yowl.'

142

The Hippopotamus

'I would have liked to have come, you know/

Hal Where is an outreach counsellor with a diploma from the University of Dunstable and a government grant, when you need one? I waited until Simon and Soda were out of earshot, smoothed Davey's ego with descriptions of how turgid and unamusing the afternoon had been and toddled into the house to dress for dinner. For tonight was to see the Logans playing host to the county, a black-tie event.

No one else was about, so it wasn't until we fore­gathered in the foregathery that I discovered Mother Mills was to be of our party.

Oliver Mills. I don't know if you've met him. He was padre of our regiment back in National Service days. He's seen the dark since and defrocked himself. That at least is his story: it is my belief, founded in idle gossip, that he became frankly too hot for the army or the church to handle. His taste for butch subalterns and zesty young rankers knew no bounds. There was an episode I heard about in '59 that may well have been the straw that broke the camel's back. A general, inspecting a platoon of glowing cadets, soon to be passed out, stopped in front of one especially doll-like ephebe.

'You, sir! Name?'

'Cyprian Manlove, sir.' (Or whatever)

'You a gentleman of sound moral fibre?'

No reply.

143

Stephen Fry

'Well, sir?1

Whereat the unfortunate boy burst into tears and scampered from the parade ground. Hanged himself by his Sam Browne, leaving a note that begged his mother's forgiveness. Nothing proved, naturally, but he was known to serve at the altar in chapel and it wasn't long before Oliver folded up his stole and plunged head first into the secular. The boy hadn't been exactly Mother Mills's type, but in those days buggers couldn't be choosers.

Oliver's first lay billet was with the BBC, a haven for the bent and faithless if ever there was one, where he directed most of those dreary kitchen-sinkers that everyone pretends were the golden produce of the golden age of television, though frankly I'd rather watch John Major dry than sit through any of that self-righteous ullage ever again. Most of the play­wrights responsible have died from alcohol poison­ing and socialist disillusionment by now, thank God, and Oliver, as you know, specialises these days in rich and loving period adaptations of the classics and fuck the workers, though he wouldn't thank you for saying so. You never knew such a one for writing priggisk round robins to the press: 'Sir, We the undersigned are horrified at the government's attempts to cut the Arts Council grant/ impose VAT on corduroy trousers/privatise Dickie Attenborough', you know the sort of mealy-mouthed sludge I'm talking about: he'll round up all the usual suspects at the Harpo

144

The Hippopotamus

Club and get them to agree to be set down as co­signatories. Once tried to get me to append my name to a screed wailing about the Net Book Agreement, whatever the badgery fuck that might be. Thoroughly amiable and amusing companion (if you like your wit tied in frilly bows) but, when the socialist bit's clamped between his expensively capped pegs, as humourless a lump of dough as ever held a torchlight vigil outside the South African Embassy or stuck an AIDS Awareness ribbon on an unwilling first-nighter.

'Quid pro quo/ I had said. 'First, you sign a letter Fm writing that urges the government to bring back town-square flogging for graffiti and littering . . .' I had notably crabby views on that head just then, the wall opposite me in Butler's Yard having recently been sprayed in lettering that looked like upside-down Arabic.

Naturally, Mother Mills had stalked away baffled. For all that, he and I were on good terms and he greeted me heartily on Thursday night at Swafford when I pottered in, freshly tubbed and scrubbed, for my pre-dinner glass of the nasty.

'Well, if it isn't the Happy Hippo,' he said - Christ, I hate that old nick-name - 'and beaten to the watering trough by a better man.'

'Hello, Oliver,' I wheezed, 'and what plucks you from Kensington?'

'Same as you, angel. R&R. Mother's been as busy

145

Stephen Fry

as a big brown bee these last few months. She's come to replenish her tissues.'

'But still sucking up the vodka, we note.'

'Not since Barbara Cartland described Fergie as vulgar have we heard such a grubby pot have the Nigella Nerve to call such a Katie Kettle black.'

I ignored him and poured myself a few fat fingers of the Macallan as he twittered on about his new love.

'Dennis. A name as romantic as fly-spray but so sweet and trusting and heavily cocked. I'll take another voddie while you're there.'

'What does he do, this Dennis?'

'Anything I ask.'

'For a living.'

'He's a social-security clerk if you must know. I met him on a Pride march.'

There are times when you envy faggotry, and times when you don't. At least we plain old hetters never have to set up house with clerks and welders and shop assistants. Call me a snob and call me unkind, but how Oliver can bear the idea of ignor­ant dull-witted oafs from Clapham or Camberwell farting in his bed and scratching their balls in front of his cheval-glass, I cannot imagine.

'And what about you, Ted? We understand you've been squiring love's young dream about the lawns and meadows.'

'Barely spoken to her.'

146

The Hippopotamus

'No, no. Not the breeder. I'm talking about the caramel-thighed Hylas of the fens. The Rupert Graves of the Iceni, as you very well know/

I did, but had affected to misunderstand.

Are you by any chance referring to my godson?'

'Please, Ted. You're a poppet when you're your­self, but not fit for firewood when you're all stiff and grumpy. Throw your mother some line or she'll have a miserable time.'

Well, put like that, a man can hardly in all char­ity keep up a chilly front.

'You'll find him a pretty little piece, I'll not deny,' I conceded, easing myself into a chair. Intense as all get out, mind you.'

'Don't I know it. While you and Simple Simon were dwile-flonking with the rough bumpkinry, he took me out on his little dinghy, much to the chagrin of the Patricia element, who was too scared or too high-heeled or too tightly stockinged or too lah-di-Mayfair-dah to climb aboard, but wanted sinful Davey all for herself none the less. And we know why, don't we?'

'We do?'

'Well, of course we do!' Oliver looked at me in amazement, saw that I was genuinely adrift and then became puzzled himself. 'Don't we? I mean, darling. I assumed you were here for the same . . .'

At this point the door opened and Max and Mary Clifford strutted in.

147

Stephen Fry

'Ah, Ted ... returned from your adventures.' Max extended a languid hand. Born in Liverpool, yet with an accent and manner that makes the Duke of Devonshire sound like Ben Elton. A self-made man who worships his creator, as someone said about somebody else, or somebody else said about some­one. His wife Mary is of Welsh stock - Wrexham, if memory doesn't deal me a dog-turd, and is also possessed of vowels like a line of Lalique icicles.

She proffered a powdery cheek and wagged a waggish finger. 'Now Ted, I hope you're going to be very well behaved and very sober tonight. The Bishop and his wife are coming over this evening and the Draycotts will be here too, so best party manners.'

Un-yippee and un-hurrah.

That goes for you too, Oliver. No atheistical talk, we beg.'

Said as if she were throwing the party and this was her house.

Is he Heidi or Lorraine?' Oliver wanted to know.

Mary looked blank. 'He's Ronald, Oliver. Ronald and Fabia, I think their names are. They used to be at Ripon.'

'I think what Oliver wants to know,' I said, 'is whether the Bishop is High Church or Low Church.'

'Thank you, precious,' said Oliver.

'Oh, nothing like that,' Max pronounced with authority, taking two sherry glasses deftly in one hand. 'Solid public-school hymnbook. No nonsense.'

148

The Hippopotamus

'Looks like Molly Moderate/ I said to Oliver.

'Hm .. / Oliver looked at his nails dreamily. Tity. I'm best at twitting the low rent, as it happens. Bishop-baiting/ he explained to Mary 'is one of Mother's specialities.'

'Now Oliver/ Mary screeched. 'I absolutely forbid . . .'

'Forbid what?' Michael had arrived, hair sleekly brushed back, sapphires winking in his shirt front.

'Oliver's threatening to tease the Bishop this evening.'

'Really?' Michael looked towards Oliver, who jiggled the ice in his glass in lazy salute. 'I think he's more likely teasing you, Mary.'

'Oh.'

'But, you're welcome to try your luck, Oliver. I believe Ronald used to box for the army. Isn't that right, Max?'

'So they tell me, Michael. So they tell me.'

Max has mastered a particular tone of voice with which he addresses Michael. It tells the world of a special relationship, a close and secret bond that shares its own private joke about the world. It drives me absolutely potty, as you can imagine. I knew Michael long before Max and his kind. There is a simultaneous envy (I know that Max, as a fellow boxwallah, can talk turkey with Michael in a way denied to me) and a protectiveness. I feel like Piggy in Lord of the Flies, left behind when Ralph is borne

149

Stephen Fry

off with the others to explore the island. 'But I was with him before anyone] I was with him when he found the conch/ I want to cry.

*

In the event the Bishop went largely unbaited. Twenty of us sat down to dinner. I suppose I had better give the guest list and you can tell me in your letter back whether you need further details.

Michael and Anne

Ted

Patricia

Max and Mary Clifford

Rose (Michael's ancient Austrian aunt, never said

a word) Oliver Simon David

Ronald and Fabia * Norvic (the Bish and Bishess) John and Margot Draycott Clara (the Cliffords' daughter - skinny wears a

brace) Tom and Margaret Purdom (local squirearchy) Malcolm and Antonia Whiting (local literati, to

please me. Ha]) YOUR MOTHER

150

The Hippopotamus

Yes, I thought that was worth leaving to the end. You could have felled me with a cocktail-stick. Your mother. Rebecca Burrell, nee Logan. In the flesh.

Five minutes before we went in to dine, the full complement, as I thought, having been mustered, a peal was heard from the doorbell and there she stood. With luggage, with presents for the boys, with all the useful clever gifts from Fortnum's that city-dwellers bestow on their deprived country cousins - rustic pies, stone-ground loaves, Norfolk honey, grain mustard and wind-dried lavender - with, in short, all the paraphernalia that betokens a long and cosy stay

'Bex!' cries Michael, falling on her neck. Then he beams at me. 'So, kiss my sister, Ted/

She was sporting a beady, I-know-you're-wearing-dirty-underpants sort of face but with the trace of a smile lurking in its margins. I'd seen her four years ago, at Christmas. Michael had been hoping to forge a rapprochement then I suspect, but it hadn't really worked. I was too rebarbative, Rebecca was at her spiky worst and Pamela Pride, as Oliver might say, had woven her wicked web all too easily. With so many people there it had been possible for us to ignore each other. It's going to be harder these next weeks.

So Jane, give it to me straight: did you or did you not know that the She-Beast of Phillimore Gardens would be coming? If so, I hate you and hate you and hate you for not warning me.

151

Stephen Fry

We were seated apart at dinner which was some kind of a relief. I had been given the treat of walk­ing Patricia in and sat between her and the squire's wife, Margaret. Simon sat at his mother's end of the table next to Clara Clifford and engaged her in conversation without vomiting at the sight of the particles of food that were getting caught in her brace, which is more than I could have managed. David sat at Michael's end, unostentatiously avoid­ing meat. He had to parry the ludicrous remarks of Antonia Whiting, some of which drifted over to my end.

'Malcolm and I are trying to set up a South Norfolk Festival of Poetry and Prose. We think Jeyes of Thetford might sponsor it. Malcolm's worried that the “J-Cloth Festival” might not sound right. What do you think?'

Oliver, largely thanks to Mary Clifford's witless proscriptions earlier on, was at his most disgrace­ful. Talk of festivals reminded him of an anecdote and he discoursed at length about the erotic adven­tures that had attended his visit to the Venice Film Festival last year.

'You won't believe the trade that you can find trolling up and down the Dorsoduro,' he said. 'After a week my back-pussy was like a wind-sock.'

'What's a back-pussy?' Davey wanted to know.

'We were rather disappointed in Venice, weren't we, Tom?' Margaret Purdom put in hastily.

152

The Hippopotamus

'The prices in Harry's Bar were ridiculous. Absolute scandal. For two Bellinis you had to pay . . .'

There was one boy/ Oliver continued, 'who worked behind the guichet at the Academia. I got him to come back to the Gritti with me only to have him deliver the sweetest warning. You see, he was possessed of the most enormous . . .'

The door opened and Podmore came in to clear away the soup plates. Oliver was equal to the occa­sion. He knows better than to talk loosely devant les domestiques. Barely pausing for breath, he put up a hand to one side of his mouth, as if to shield Podmore from corruption, and continued, '. . . the most enormous C-O-C-K .. .' spelling the word out in a loud and frantic whisper. Podmore's chin wobbled a fraction and Margaret Purdom let out a small scream, but Oliver looked pleased with his social adroitness.

It was so sweet/ he went on, once Podmore had departed, 'Gianni, for such was his name, anxiously explained, in one of those divinely dusty Italian voices, that he was afraid he might hurt me. “Carissimo,” I said, 'Til grant you it's a monster, but after what I've been through this last week you'll be lucky if it touches the sides. It'll be like a paper boat up the Grand Canal." Still, that's enough of me. You much of a traveller, Bishop?'

Patricia nudged me. 'Oliver makes it all up of course, doesn't he?' she whispered.

153

Stephen Fry

'Naturally/ I said. 'Nobody has sex any more, straight or bent.'

'What on earth do you mean?'

'It's the great paradox of the age. Before permis­siveness came in, everyone everywhere was at it like randy goats. But the moment the young started to insist on talking about it all the time, you couldn't get laid if you were a table at the Savoy. As soon as something becomes a Right you can't bloody do it any more. Self-consciousness, you see/

'In Gerald's Fortnight, my third novel.. / Malcolm Whiting said.

'I just think it's all so unnecessary/ the Purdom offered from my right.

'Unnecessary?' Oliver's ears had pricked up at the other end of the table.

'Hear, hear/ said Max.

'The protagonist of Gerald's Fortnight . . .'

'The day sex becomes unnecessary,' said Michael, 'will be a dark one indeed.'

I was glad he had decided to join in. There is nothing worse than a Jew sitting and listening to a conversation. They nod their heads with a fraudu­lent air of rabbinical wisdom that makes you want to set about them with staves.

'Do you mean sex is now unnecessary because of artificial insemination?' asked Simon, having a pitiful stab at sounding sophisticated.

'I'm not saying hex itself is unnecessary . . .'

154

The Hippopotamus

Margaret Purdom is one of those ghastly upper-middle-class people who can't quite bring them­selves to pronounce the V in sex. 'I just mean the endless talking about it and showing it on television and rubbing our noses in it.'

'Does it shock you, Mrs Purdom?' asked Oliver.

'Of course not . . . it's just so uncalled for. There was a thing on the other day . . .'

'What about tea-drinking?'

'I beg your pardon?'

'Tea-drinking/ said Oliver. 'Do you object to that on television?'

'Well, of course not. I don't see . . .'

'Nobody calls for tea-drinking though, do they? I mean, in television dramas, the camera could easily show the kettle boiling on the hob and then cut discreetly away. But no, they have to show the whole thing. The warming of the tea-pot, the pouring-out, the plopping of the sugar-cube and the slow sipping from the cup. Isn't that “unnecessary” too? Isn't that completely uncalled for?'

'Hardly the same thing, Oliver,' said Max.

'No, of course not! Because no one is shocked by tea-drinking, are they? They are shocked by sex but they daren't admit it. I could respect that Mary Whitehouse creature and her moral minority if they had the Betty Balls to admit that they were in fact frankly and deeply shocked by the spectacle of naked coupling on a public screen. Shocked to their

155

Stephen Fry

winceyette knicky-knicks. But, instead, they think it's more impressive to give off a tiresome worldly air. “I'm not shocked,” they say "oh good heavens no. I just find it all rather boring/ as if Tessa Tedium were the Chrissie Crime.'

While Ma Purdom struggled for a reply (to an argument that I suspect Oliver had trotted out many times before . . . probably on one of those The People Grill the Producers' shows that the BBC now inflict endlessly on us in a futile attempt to crawl to the audience), bold husband Tom leapt to her defence.

'Yes that's all very clever-clever/ he said, 'but you can't argue that the world isn't in an unhealthy moral state.'

'Wouldn't think of it, dearest. People lie, cheat, rape, swindle, kill, maim, torture and destroy. Bad thing. People also pop into bed together and cosy up. Good thing. If we imagine fucking is a sign of moral decay we're being just a little bit stupid-stupid, aren't we?'

'I still don't see why we have to go on about it all the time,' said Margaret.

'Gerald's Fortnight was accused by critics of . . .'

'If you really want to crack down on promiscu­ity among the young,' said the Bishop, 'then you should surely fight for sex scenes on television to be more realistic. Show the whole thing with actors that look like real people instead of like models.

156

The Hippopotamus

Once children know about the squelch and the stench and the whole slippery mess of it they may become less anxious to try it out until they have to/

Bit hard on the Lady Bishop I felt, but a point well made. Patricia at this point, heated by such saucy talk, started consciously or unconsciously to rub her leg against mine. It was good to have a woman's thigh pressing against me and, victim of the primal curse on man, which is a need to show off to women, I embarked on holding the company spellbound for a while with my sparkling theories on art and life.

Oliver, being the bitch he is, tried consistently to undermine me with bitter little interjections. I held my own, naturally, but refused to allow the conver­sation to sink into sterile mud-slinging.

'Returning to the subject of sex for a moment/ said Michael, during a pause which followed a more than usually platitudinous observation from Simon. 'When I bought Newsline Papers Ltd, I called a conference of interested parties to see whether we should stop showing naked women in the pages of our tabloids/

Interested parties being bricklayers and spotty teenagers, no doubt?' said Oliver.

'Being psychologists, sociologists, feminists, moral­ists and representatives of religions,' said Michael. 'The bricklayer and the teenager I can cope with. I

157

Stephen Fry

said to these experts, “Pretend you own this news­paper. If you can't turn it into profit in six months you're out of a job. What do you do?” Well, you never heard such nonsense in your life. “Let's have more good news”, “Make it a family paper”, “Show women in a positive light”, “affirmation”, “family values” ... I slapped on the table in front of them a copy of the rival paper. “This is the competition,” I said. “It sells millions every day. It is the opposite of everything you have mentioned, but it sells. Why? Tell me please, why? Because people are stupid? Because people are cruel? Because people are ignor­ant? Because people are savage? Why?” And they answered, “Because it's there. It sells because it's there.” “The Independent is there too,” I said, “and the Christian Science Monitor and Spare Rib and the Morning Star. They are there too, but they don't sell. Give me a better answer.” But no better answer came.'

'Of course not. Because what they wanted to say,' said Max, 'is that newspapers should be under their control. They know better.'

'Well, who's to say they don't know better, Max?' Michael said. 'Perhaps they do know better about many things. About selling newspapers they don't know better, that I will say. I tried running for a few weeks without naked ladies and the circulation dropped. We put the naked ladies back in and the sales rose. What else could I have done?'

158

The Hippopotamus

'You could have gone into another fucking busi­ness/ said David with sudden and extraordinary ferocity.

The whole table froze in a fraught and deathly silence. There was something terrible about such savagery from such a source. Few things are more sphincter-winkingly embarrassing than a family row at the best of times. I could hear Patricia beside me holding her breath.

'Well, Davey/ said Michael, 'I did go into another business, if you remember. I sold the newspapers/

'And someone else bought them and is profitably printing pictures of naked ladies to this very day/ said Max.

'Well, thank God it isn't my father!' David was trembling at his own courage but otherwise he managed to maintain a steadfast front.

'Davey is very concerned with the whiteness of my soul/ said Michael ruefully, much as a husband might joke about his wife's solicitude for his waistline.

There was a sudden outbreak of little local conver­sations and no single topic dominated the party again for the rest of the dinner.

Davey left the table with the ladies but Simon stayed for the port, his demeanour failing hopelessly to project an air of being simultaneously grown-up, respectful, blase, grateful and impassive.

Max slid down to my end of the table and put an arm to my shoulder.

159

Stephen Fry

'Well, that was a sticky one, I think/ he said in a low voice. 'Of course, little Davey can do no wrong, can he? The sun shines out of little Davey's rear end, doesn't it? If Simon had said such an unctu­ous and insolent thing, not that he would, there would have been hell to pay/

I remembered that Max was Simon's godfather and found myself amused that he should show such loyalty. I felt bound to reciprocate and soon we were at it like a couple of old generals taking sides over a rematch of Waterloo.

'Well, he may have been a tad unctuous, but it was brave, it was spirited and it was felt.'

'Sodding cheek and you know it, Ted/

'So, it's better to be drained of imagination and ideals at birth than to risk losing them later on, is that it?'

'Simon isn't devoid of imagination or ideals. It's just that he has manners and decency enough to respect others.'

'The kind of manners and decency that question nothing, challenge nothing and achieve nothing.'

'Oh pish, Ted. As if you believe a word of that. You're the most cynical man in Britain and you know it'

'Never, Max/ I said, 'never, ever tell a man he is cynical. Cynical is the name we give those we fear may be laughing at us.'

'Don't get all gnomic with me, you old fraud.'

160

The Hippopotamus

The trouble with Max, repellent as he may be, is that he is not quite as stupid as one would like him to be. Not that he's brilliant, it's just that he's always just a tiny bit brighter than would be convenient.

This is a silly conversation, Max.'

'You're right. If the truth be told, I just came over to steal a cigarette off you. Can't cope with Michael's enormous cigars.' I obliged him and he puffed on it like a schoolboy. 'Heard about your dishonourable discharge from the rag. Sorry about that. Quite agree with you over the Lake man. His plays get worse and worse. Pleased that Rebecca's arrived, are you? You and she . . . weren't you . . . once upon a long ago?'

1 believe I'm not the only one,' I said, then wished I hadn't.

Max flashed his eyes at me and then down to the stem of his glass. 'Well, well. Now who on earth can have told you that, I wonder?'

These things get about.'

'No they don't. Oh no they don't. Only happened once. A Christmas some years back. In this very house. And I thought we'd been so very discreet. Well, well, well. There's a mystery. Can't be the lady in the case, can it? Fancy that, just fancy that.'

I wriggled a bit on this hook. It was hardly my intention to land David in the poo; in his relation of the Great Shooting Sabotage (you'll have read

161

Stephen Fry

that by now; Jane) he had only told me the story of Rebecca and Max in the night-time as an inci­dental detail. He hadn't even understood it himself at the time.

In casting about for a convincing way to change the subject, I recalled something that Donald Pulsifer the wild-life photographer had once told me. The way to confuse and pacify an angry gorilla, he said, is to start hitting yourself. If you make a blistering assault upon your own person, slapping your cheeks, punching yourself in the stomach, tearing at your hair and clawing at your face, the animal will stop in its tracks, tilt its head and - likely as not - come forward to cuddle and caress you in sympathy, lick­ing your wounds and cradling you like a baby.

'Can't deny it was a shock to see Rebecca coming through the door this evening,' I said, deciding to test Pulsifer's theory. 'We had a furious row at Jane's christening. Well, that's what I tell the world. The fact of the matter is I was drunk and I was dreadful. A couple of years earlier Rebecca had nourished something of a tendre for me, you see. To her I was rather more than a casual bedmate. My first wife Fee had run off with that American Open Field poet and I had become a sodden and available mess. Then Patrick Burrell started lapping and sniffing around her loins and she gave me an ultimatum. “If you don't marry me, I'll up and marry Patrick,” she said. “Then marry the daft turd,” says

162

The Hippopotamus

I. “What the fuck do I care?” That was bad. Very bad. She kept to her word, duly wed the oily rat and out popped Jane, for whom I was chosen as godfather, as much, I believed, to prove to me that she was “Happy! Ha, ha! Blissfully, blissfully happy,” as anything else, and I accepted to show that there were no hard feelings on my side either. And then at the . . . what do you call them . . . wakes? That can't be right, at the christening party . . . there must be a proper name for them ... I did a very stupid thing/

'Oh yes?' Max was sucked in now and seemed to have lost interest in my knowledge of his own little secret.

'I found Rebecca alone in the conservatory. I said to her that I missed her. I said to her that I wished I hadn't let her marry Patrick/

'Oh, you idiot/

'It was true. Damnation, it was true/

'What use was that to her?'

'Well I know that now, don't I? I had imagined, in my champagne blur, that she would be touched. Instead of which she smashed fifteen panes of conservatory window and roof in her fury. I let it be put about that she had been repelling my unwanted advances.'

'Well, that certainly explains a great deal,' said Max. 'Do you know, I have always wondered why Rebecca freezes at the sound of your name?'

163

Stephen Fry

'Well, now you know.'

'Lord, Ted, I'd've thought you knew women better than to have made a blunder like that.'

This egregious man-of-the-world matiness hardly qualified in my book as cradling my head and lick­ing my wounds, but it was an improvement on the icy stare of a minute ago.

'Let's have you down this end, you two/ called Michael. 'We're going to have some fun with the ladies and those balloons.'

So we filled our lungs with helium, crept into the drawing room and made the women scream.

An evening of games followed, the details of which you won't be anxious to hear. I rather shone in charades, fooling everyone with my vivid portrayal of an army of rabbits calling a truce.

'It must be Watership DownV everyone cried.

Ha, ha. It was War and Peace. Warren Peace, do you see?

Simon made an arse of himself as guesser in a round of 'In the Manner of the Word', on account of never having heard of the word 'archly'. I'm afraid he is rather an oaf, that boy.

I tried to get Oliver alone to quiz him about our earlier, interrupted, conversation, you remember the one I mean?

'Patricia . . . wanted sinful Davey all for herself. . . And we know why, don't we?'

We doT

164

The Hippopotamus

'Well, of course we do1. Don't we? I mean, darling. I assumed you were here for the same . . .'

But Oliver proved elusive, and after bidding good­night to the non-resident guests, we all wound our ways to our several beds.

And now it is Saturday morning, an equestrian party has departed for trottings, canterings and gallopings about the park, my neck is stiff, Podmore has promised to provide a late breakfast and this letter is done.

Yours aye

Ted

165

5

12a Onslow Terrace LONDON SW7

27th July 1992

Dear Ted,

What a long letter. How beautifully printed. How absorbing. How alarming. I shall answer your numer­ous questions one at a time.

Patricia: Yes, I did know that she would be join­ing you at the weekend. I saw no special reason to tell you. She is not spying on the spy if that has been worrying you. She is there simply because she wants to be. As you discovered, she is recovering from an unhappy love affair. I am very interested in her comings and goings, however, and would beg you to watch closely there. Patricia is very vulner­able and I want her to come to no harm.

Mummy: I had no idea that she would be coming down, although I am not surprised to hear it. I am very grateful for the elliptical (is that the word?) way in which you have filled me in about your rela­tionship with her. She often moves from place to

166

The Hippopotamus

place without telling me; there is nothing unusual in that. She knows nothing of the reason for your visit (nor does Patricia) although both of them are aware of my leukaemia, as are the Logans.

Michael: I am sure he will consent to your request. If he doesn't it hardly matters, you will just have to be an unofficially inquisitive guest instead of a licensed writer-in-residence.

There are now a number of specific things that you can do for me.

Firstly: Please stop using Latin tags in your letters. You should by now be beyond the stage of having to demonstrate your superiority over me. The same goes for pointing out spelling mistakes and incor­rect usages.

Secondly: Enquire about the twins, Edward and James. You have hardly mentioned them. You say they are 'staying with family'. What family? Where? Why? When are they returning? This may be important.

Thirdly: Find out how Oliver is and what brings him here.

Fourthly: I need more information about Aunt Anne. You told me nothing for instance of her reac­tion to David's outburst about Michael's newspaper holdings at the dinner-table on Thursday.

Fifthly: On no account mess around with Patricia. She is very special and not to be trifled with.

Sixthly: You have talked only about the guests. The house is full of other men and women. There

167

Stephen Fry

are indoor and outdoor servants, there is Podmore. I have heard nothing of them.

Seventhly: Constant vigilance; constant awareness; constant observation; constant openness.

I shall write no more because I want you to get this as soon as possible.

Much love

Jane

II

Swafford Hall

Swafford

DISS

Norfolk

25th July 1993

Jane -

As you can see, I'm at Swafford! You'll never imag­ine who's here too! Your mother for one, looking fantastically elegant, and . . . wait for it . . . Ted Wallace, your long-lost godfather. I wish you could make it over too. You've always said you wanted to get to know him. As far as I can tell he's here for simply ever, so why don't you come on down? He and your mother seem to be getting on rather well, which is a bit of a surprise - David tells me they used to hate each other.

168

The Hippopotamus

And what about David?! Everything you said seems to be absolutely true, though there is the veri-tablest queue for his attentions. I'm having to fight off that dreadful Oliver Mills as well as Ted and even, I think, your mother, just to get five minutes alone with him.

Who else is here? Oh, Max and Mary Clifford, natch, and their daughter Clara who's rather squinty and peculiar and unfortunate. Michael's been a bit quiet but we had an incident-packed dinner party on Thursday, lots of local worthies present, includ­ing Ronald Leggatt, the Bishop of Norwich, and his fat wife, Fabia. The Draycotts were there naturally, those dreary literary people the Whitings, and some other couple I couldn't place.

As soon as we sat down, Oliver started behaving dreadfully, telling all kinds of shatteringly inappro­priate stories and talking about sex in a loud voice, so I gave Ted who was sitting beside me a swift kick to get him to try and change the subject. Big mistake! I think you have been well off not knowing that man. There are football hooligans in gaol who could fairly claim to be more sensitive and less piggish.

'I blame this ghastly obsession with therapy,' he said, on the subject of everybody's obsession with sex. Tt's a short space between “therapist” and “the rapist”, after all.'

'What's wrong with therapy, Ted?' I asked - I hope not too snappishly. I didn't want to give the

169

Stephen Fry

impression that I'd been under one myself.

'Well, it comes down to which damned language you choose, doesn't it?' he said, in an extravagantly patient voice, as if I were a two-year-old. I think he is one of those kind of men who would talk to Marie Curie as if she were a drooling illiterate.

'Are you talking about sexual discourse here?' Malcolm Whiting asked.

'No, he's discoursing about sexual talk,' said Oliver.

'I wrote a book called The Love Tree which you may have . . .' the Whiting idiot started to say.

'I'm saying this,' Uncle T. interrupted. 'In the old days, when we thought that our souls were at stake, Latin had all the authority and it was the curate or the cure who did the curing. Now, in the technical age, we say psyche for soul, and therapist for curate, Greek being the language of science. Mind you, with all this New Age wank around, we've turned to Anglo-Saxon too and the world has started to blather on about “healing”. Same process - holy, sane or healthy: cure, therapy or healing.'

'You really don't see a difference, Mr Wallace?' asked the Bishop. 'You don't perceive different kinds of ill-health?'

'Different kinds of “unholiness”, you mean? Well. If I break my leg I go to see my old friend Doctor Posner. If I break my heart I go to see my old friend Doctor Macallan.'

170

The Hippopotamus

'Doctor Macallan?'

'He means whisky/ your mother explained, while directing an acid “Why-can't-you-shut-up-and-leave-well-alone?” look at Ted.

'Ah/ said the Bishop, 'and suppose one of your children were sick in some way?'

'Loopy?'

'If you like. I assume you wouldn't fill them up with whisky?'

'It's always struck me/ said Max, 'that if some­one believed they were Napoleon I'd send them to someone else who believed that they were the Duke of Wellington. That'd sort them out.'

'Few people are spiritually unhealthy in quite such a clear-cut way however/ the Bishop said.

'Ah well, “spiritually” is your word, you see,' replied Ted. 'One man's “spiritual ill-health” is another man's “lack of self-esteem” is another man's “oversupply of blood-sugar” is another man's “holis­tic imbalance”. You pays your exorbitant fee and you takes your worthless choice. The fact is noth­ing can ever be truly cured or therapied or made whole.'

'Whatever do you mean?' Michael asked. This was getting dangerous.

'Everything rots. At the risk of special pleading, only art can halt the process.'

'What a load of pompous balls, darling,' said Oliver. 'Gone are the days when art bestowed

171

Stephen Fry

immortality. “So long lives this, and this gives life to thee” and all that wank. The invention of the camera gave us all eternal life. The Dark Lady and the Golden Boy of the sonnets are no more immor­tal now than Oprah Winfrey or the contestants on the “Wheel of Fortune”.'

Ted wasn't having any of that. 'You don't believe that for a moment and besides, it isn't what I meant. You must surely confess that artists, certainly dead ones, are more intelligent, sensitive and intuitive than any therapist with a degree in psychogibber from Keele university or any scurfy outreach parson with a diploma from King's or for that matter any mad Druid channelling energy with hot hands and a lump of amethyst.'

'But honey, we all know that art is what drives people mad.'

'Oh, artists are mad, Oliver, I'll give you that. Every man Jack and every woman Jill of them. All practitioners of the spirit are mad. Show me a sane psychotherapist and I'll show you a charlatan, show me a holy priest, saving the Bishop's reverence, and I'll show you an apostate, show me a healthy New Age healer and I'll show you a mountebank. But who's to say that sending a patient to a recital or an art gallery isn't a better balm for hurt minds than forcing them to talk about their relationship with their mothers or stuffing them full of Holy Bread?'

'But you do distinguish between the mind and

172

The Hippopotamus

the body I suppose?' Rebecca said. 'I mean, you wouldn't send a man with a physical disease to an art gallery, surely?'

'Of course he would. That's why the Tate is already so full of lepers,' said Max, earning rather a cheap and obvious laugh, I thought.

The anti-hero of The Love Tree is brought down by . . .'

'No, no.' Ted was getting het up now. 'A mechan­ical fault can be corrected and medicine is perfectly competent at that. But it isn't healing, it isn't making whole!

And healing can only come from art?'

I felt we were drowning in precisely the sort of conversation we shouldn't be having, but I honestly couldn't see any way out of it. All the Logans, David, Simon, Michael and Anne, were staring at Ted, practically open-mouthed.

Tut it this way,' replied Ted, 'we're all grown­ups. Even the religious amongst us are no longer superstitious. Nobody happy and confident believes in ghosts or telepathy or miracles. But art abides. It is the only thing that not only cannot be disproved, but can actually be tangibly and incontrovertibly proved.'

He looked round with an indecently smug expression on his face, as if challenging us to disagree. Most of us just gawped down at our dinner-plates in embarrassment. It couldn't have

173

Stephen Fry

been more killingly awful if he had taken out his whanger and stuffed it in Lady Draycott's ear. David stared at me in consternation and Rebecca shook her head sorrowfully. Then Simon, stupid clod-hopping Simon, above whose head the whole undercurrent had flowed (if that makes sense), started to speak.

'Well, I think that there are some things that can't be explained . . .' he began, but mercifully Michael galloped to the rescue by talking about his news­papers.

Even that wasn't safe ground, mind you. It provoked a very strange scene with David blurting out how he'd always hated Michael owning tabloids. The young can be so puritanical, can't they? I can remember being a bit like that at his age, but not quite as daring. Michael took it like a lamb, but all in all it had turned into a very odd dinner party.

But what was Ted up to? I mean he does know, I assume? Perhaps I should take him aside and tell him not to meddle? Unless his slobbery grins mean nothing, he's desperate to sleep with me, so I should be able to get him to behave. He spent all of yester­day banged up in his room 'writing', which proba­bly means drinking his shame away.

It's such a pity you aren't here, Jane. Surely those doctors will have finished their tests by now? I don't know how you can bear to miss all the fun. I reluc­tantly confess that Oliver ought to be first in the

174

The Hippopotamus

queue as his need is greater than mine, but my Lord I'm looking forward to it all . . .

All my love

Pat

PS: Blast, I've missed the Saturday post, so you won't get this till Tuesday at the earliest.

Ill

Swafford 28.vii.92

Jane,

Disaster. Absolute fucking disaster. I don't know how it happened and I don't know how I'm going to tell you. I am tempted to run from Swafford squealing the words 'Fly, fly! All is lost!' It may be that flight will be pre-empted in any case, by a swift and savage ejection. The threat hangs over me like the sword of Damocles. That's Greek by the way, so it's allowed . . . which brings me to this point: where the hell do you get off telling me to avoid Latin tags? Amongst the dwindling number of perks that come with old age are included:

A) a literal and metaphorical presbyopia which

175

Stephen Fry

allows distant schoolgirls and distant schoolboy Latin to come sharply into focus

B) a contempt for self-image and the opinion of others

C) the respect and deference of one's juniors (or - if that is too Latinate for you - 'the high thought and fealty of one's youngers').

Or so I had fondly imagined.

We'll make a deal: I will lay off the Latin if you promise never EVER to use words like 'special' again. Thank you.

Now, to explain the disaster.

How much do you know about computers? A great deal more than me, I should imagine. The machine I'm using at the moment is the first I have ever touched. I think of it really as no more than a socially ambitious type-writer. It belongs to Simon and has been transported to my room together with its printer and a simply baroque quantity of cabling. It lives on the writing-desk and hums irritably like the engine-room of a submarine. When I haven't used it for a while the monitor succumbs to a fit and gaudily coloured fish swim quietly to and fro across the screen, which eccentric mannerism I find strangely endearing. The computer has a device attached to it called a MOUSE, on account of the squeaking noise it makes when it is grabbed and rubbed along a hard surface.

All I know about the use of the thing is that I

176

The Hippopotamus

have to SAVE all the time. This soterial require­ment has no evangelical basis, but is said to keep me from accidentally erasing the things that I am typing. You give the work you are saving a FILE­NAME. My letters to you are stored by the computer in a little envelope on the screen. The envelope is called TED'S FOLDER and the letters are called JANE.l and JANE.2. I may call them letters, but the computer calls them FILES. This is something of a misnomer as they are nothing like a file, but that is neither here, there nor anywhere. Be patient. This is getting somewhere.

When I sat down at the computer this morning to write this I decided first to reread my last letter to you so as to' remind myself of its contents. The procedure for this is relatively simple. I point my mouse at the FILE I need to look at, then twice in rapid succession I depress a button on the mouse's head and, as if by technology, the text of the letter appears on the screen.

As I was preparing for this operation, I noticed for the first time that on the screen, inside TED'S FOLDER, next to the FILENAME of every docu­ment, there is printed a lot of incidental informa­tion of a wearisome technical nature: SIZE, KIND, LABEL, things of this kind, followed by numbers and abstruse acronyms. There are another two columns which say 'CREATED' and 'LAST MODI­FIED'. I realised that these descriptions refer to

177

Stephen Fry

DATES. In other words, just by looking at a file you can see when it was first written and when you last made alterations to it.

Well, blow me down if I didn't discover that JANE.2, my last letter to you, claimed that it was 'Modified on 27/07/92 at 20.04' - or five past eight yesterday evening. Now, I know for a fact that I was sucking down pre-dinner cocktails in the library with Rebecca, Oliver and Max at five past eight yester­day evening. I also know for a fact that I haven't so much as looked at the computer since my marathon session on Friday and Saturday, the 24th and 25th.

I looked through the text to see if it had indeed been 'modified'. I couldn't find any alterations, but then you see, anybody could have accidentally pressed the spacebar while reading the letter through and this would have counted as modification enough to change the ascription under the FILENAME heading.

Well, next I thought I was being absurdly para­noid. How could I be sure that the computer knows the date anyway? For all I know it believes that this is a cold December night in Heidelberg at the height of the Holy Roman Empire. To test this (as I could find no way of instructing the computer to divulge to me its idea of the day of the week) I wrote a brand-new letter and then looked to see what date it was stamped with. There is no doubt about it, the computer is accurate to the minute.

178

The Hippopotamus

This can only mean that SOMEBODY has read my last letter to you. This would never have happened if you'd allowed me to communicate in MANUSCRIPT (that's English for handwriting).

I don't know who the culprit can be. This machine belongs to Simon and he certainly knows how to work it ... he has some ridiculous program stored here which lists the Swafford estate's game-chick population and records the progress of the shoot­ing season. His familiarity with computers might be said to count in his favour perhaps, since he is unlikely to have been so dumb as to have made an alteration to the text of my letter and then saved it in such a way that I, a complete novice, can tell that it has been tampered with. On the other hand, we do know that Simon is not one of nature's brightest specimens.

David perhaps? Perfectly possible, except that he is so obsessively honest and 'good' and strait-laced that I imagine he would pluck out his eyes rather than catch himself reading another man's letters. The bottom-bitingly horrible thought that occurs to me, if it turns out that it was Davey, however, is that he has therefore read my less than compli­mentary remarks about his fucking poem. Ooya.

It cannot have been Oliver, Max or Rebecca, that we can say with certainty. They were with me from seven fifty-five until the end of dinner. The rest of the house-party, Simon, David, Clara, Michael, Anne,

179

Stephen Fry

Mary and Patricia, were all downstairs by twenty past I reckon, so unless I can prove that the Butler Did It we may have to send for Poirot.

But that's not the point really is it? The worry is not who, but what next? It was a damnably long letter and besides being stuffed with the indiscreetest of gossip, it would reveal to anyone that I am being paid by you to sniff around: hence my fear that I may be about to be shown the door. For the moment I am brazening the thing out. Damn technology. Damn you. Damn me and damn whoever is respon­sible.

Next we come to the Seven Proclamations of Onslow Terrace which you nailed up in your last communication.

1. Stop using Latin

We've dealt with that one.

2. Enquire about the twins

Hum. The twins have been staying, in answer to your question, with Anne's sister Diana, who lives, as I'm sure you recall, near Inverness. Edward suffers from asthma and the air in Scotland is believed, at this time of year, to be less harmful than the air in Norfolk. James and Edward are inconsolable if parted: therefore they have gone together. But youil hear more on that subject under Proclamation Four.

180

The Hippopotamus

3. Find out how Oliver is and what brings him here

I really didn't know at first what you meant by 'find out how he is'. He is . . . Oliver, I thought. As to what brought him here: his exact explanation last Saturday was 'R&R', which perhaps you didn't under­stand. It is Eighties-speak and means Rest and Recreation or possibly Rest and Recuperation, at a pinch Rest and Relaxation. Not Rock and Roll, nor Rhyme and Reason, nor Rough and Ready, nor Radicals and Revolutionaries, nor Rum 'n' Raisin: not any other damned thing, just plain Rest and Recreation.

There is a pleasing American saying: 'If it looks like a duck and walks like a duck then it probably is a duck.' Oliver looks like a man in need of R&R and walks like a man in need of R&R, I reasoned. Therefore he probably is in need of R&R. I couldn't imagine why you wanted me to find out more.

Ever your obedient, however, I bearded him yesterday morning after breakfast. He sat in the library, filling a shaft of light with cigarette smoke and emptying the newspapers of gossip.

'Morning, heartsworth. Guess which little play at the Nash is sold out to the end of its run?'

He was referring of course to Michael Lake's Demiparadise, the cause of my fall, currently wowing them at the National Theatre.

It would hardly have been worth my making a fuss about it,' I said, defending my attack on the piece, 'if I thought it was going to fold in a fortnight.

181

Stephen Fry

It was because I knew, absolutely knew, that the public would eat it whole. That's the point.'

'If there's one thing Teddy can't bear, it's a success­ful left-winger who's stayed left-wing. Every time you think of Michael Lake and his kind, Gertie Guilt scampers up and swings her handbag right into your solar plexus, doesn't she?'

'Oh, Oliver, not this conversation.' I sank into a chair opposite him, the slant of sunlight falling between us.

Oliver and I had been on an Aldermaston march together, had joined the same Labour club (West Chelsea, naturally .. . nothing too hairy or tattooed) and contributed to the same periodicals, which in those days were so left-leaning they needed the support of Moscow to keep them from falling over. I couldn't have been happier than to seize upon the Prague Spring in 1967 as a perfect excuse to leave, in every sense, the party. Oliver always pretends that I betrayed him, betrayed my principles and betrayed that non-existent heap of prejudice and ignorance, the 'people'. Of course we all know that the real trai­tor, Oliver's necessary Judas, was none other than his beloved History. He has got to the age now when he considers it worth foisting on the world lamentably evasive and heavily edited editions of his journal, or 'Daisy Diary' as he refers to the work privately. The years 1955 to 1970 have just been published, lots of sanctimonious ordure heaped on my head, but very

182

The Hippopotamus

little about his disgusting basement-nightclub activ­ities, naturally. Just a few mealy-mouthed phrases about the 'awakening of the gay identity' and arse-wash of that nature. Most of'Daisy' consists of media gossip and his usual monocular interpretation of politics. 'Them' are callous and shiftless, 'Us' are heroes of the people.

'Not this conversation?' he said. 'What would you rather speak about? The smelliness of the work­ing man and his ingratitude in refusing to have heard of you?'

'My breakfast is just digesting/ I said. 'I refuse to have it brought to the surface by a man lecturing me on political morals from the comfort of a rich leather chair in a millionaire's country-house library.'

'A political truth is a political truth whether spoken from a working man's pub or a gentleman's club, dearest, and well you know it. But,' he added sweetly, sensing that I was ready to confound him with a reply, 'you're right. Let's talk of cabbages, not kings. Simon tells me that without rain, the winter barley is going to be looking pretty jolly silly soon. What's more, Hetty the Hose-Pipe Ban will shortly be paying a visit unless Clara Cloud can be pinched and made to cry.'

'Talking of Clara,' I said, wondering whether there was some accidental significance in Oliver's choice of that Christian name. 'What's going on with the Clifford product? Is she ... I mean . . .'

183

Stephen Fry

'If you mean, is she two faggots short of a corps de ballet, then no, darling. She's fourteen, she's got a little bit of a squint, her teeth stick out, she has no friends and no bust and nothing can make her happy. You could hardly expect her to be the life and soul of the party, now, could you?'

'What about you? Everything up to snuff?'

'Oh lor, we're about to be quizzed on Safety, I can tell. Mother's very safe, thank you, baby, and very sound. Socialism is still her only communica­ble disease.'

'You've lost a bit of weight, though.'

'In the days when I grew up, when Fitzrovia was the heartland of the civilised world and Quentin was still Crisp, losing weight was held to be rather desirable. Nowadays it would appear to be a flag of shame. Just because we like to take it up the Gary Glitter, darling, it doesn't mean we have to grow fat to satisfy the fears of our friends.'

'Oh, for goodness' sake will you stop expecting me to tread everywhere with precious little tippy-toes of political correctness.'

'Darling, the real political correctness in this coun­try, as you very well know, is to stuff the minori­ties and howl “Sanctimony, sanctimony” at anyone who dares suggest different.'

We just can't help it, Oliver and I. We wouldn't be able to discuss prospects in the Danish football league without bickering.

184

The Hippopotamus

'Well, it's wonderful to see you looking so fit, then/ I offered.

'Ha, well, that's where you're wrong, you fat Ted. The real reason I'm losing weight is because my Dennis won't let me eat anything worth eating. I may have a cute figure, but I've also got acute angina.'

'Oh, my dear Oliver, I'm very sorry.'

'It's only chest pains, not the real thing. But my sweet Dennis chooses to interpret it as a Warning.'

'So you've come here to escape his eagle eye and stuff yourself as full of good food as you can?'

'Something like that, Ted, yes.'

So. There you have it, Jane. That answers Proclamation 3, I hope.

4. More information about Aunt Anne

Later that same morning Davey dragged me off round to the stables to say hello to the horses and hounds. Annie came clattering into the yard on her return from the morning gallop.

'This is a first,' she said, dismounting. 'Are we about to see you ride, Ted?'

'Given our respective weights, it would probably be fairer if the horse got on my back and rode me,' I said.

A groom came to take Annie's mount.

'Could I have a word, Lady Anne?' he asked.

185

Stephen Fry

'What is it, Mr Tubby?' That's Lilac. Simon reckon she's sick.' We clustered round the stable door of the horse in question. Lilac is a large bay mare belonging to Michael. She stood at an angle, her head pressed against the side wall, a forlorn attitude that may or may not have betokened illness, and certainly seemed to indi­cate a rather depressed outlook on life. Horses strike me as being so perpetually dull of eye and stupid of demeanour that it is never easy to determine, as it might be with dogs, what state of health they are in. 'Simon was here for the morning rounds and noticed she want taking her feed and she was circling round and round and there was blood in her spit­tle,' said Tubby.

'But she was all right yesterday, was she?' 'She was ever so well yisty, Lady Anne.' (Forgive the attempts at rendering the dialogue, Jane dear. It's rather a challenge.) 'She come in from pasture full of spirit.'

'Oh dear, have you any idea what it might be?' 'Simon want certain, he's afraid that might be ragwort poisoning or maybe grass fever.'

'Oh, dear, I do hope he's wrong. Surely we would have noticed if it was ragwort? It takes time, doesn't it?'

'That can come sudden, Lady Anne, so Simon say.'

Who was supposed to be the expert, I wondered,

Simon or this paid professional? A case of passing

186

The Hippopotamus

the buck, I supposed. If the horse suddenly went mad and bit everybody, it would be Master Simon's fault not the groom's.

Davey stroked the horse's muzzle and blew gently up its nose. 'I wonder,' he said, starting to open the stable door, 'if . . .'

'NO, Davey! No!' Annie screamed. 'Come away from there at onceV

David leapt back from the gate as if it had been surging with high-voltage electricity. Tubby looked discreetly away, but I felt free to goggle.

'I'm sorry, darling, I didn't mean to shout.' Anne's breath, like the mare's, was snorting from her nostrils as she wound down from her peculiar outburst. 'Ill horses can be very dangerous. Very temperamental.'

David was scarlet with bafflement or embarrass­ment or fear or rage or frustration. 'Lilac knows me as well as anyone . . .' he managed to say.

Anne gained full command of herself, anxious to preserve a front before Tubby and myself. 'I know, darling, I know. But until we know what's wrong with her, there's always the danger of infection. There are a number of things horses can get which humans can catch, you see.'

'When did I last catch anything!1 asked David.

Annie turned to me brightly. 'I'm popping into Norwich to see my dentist in half an hour,' she said. 'Why don't you both come along? David can show you the sights.'

187

Stephen Fry

I sat in the front of the Range Rover next to Anne, with a subdued, if not sulky, David in the back.

The twins will be coming home tomorrow/ she said. 'Angus and Diana are off on their hols/

'And Edward?'

'He's been taking a new treatment out of his asthma season, all through the winter and spring. So far there's been no trouble, so we do feel we can risk him coming home. If it starts up again we may have to rethink. There's a place in Switzerland Margot was telling me about. I miss them dreadfully.'

She had surprised the world and herself when, at the age of forty-eight, she had waxed pregnant with twins. I remembered them as eighteen-month-old blobs at Christmas '88 when last I had visited Swafford.

'They'll be on their way to being five soon, I suppose?'

'That's another reason to have them back. Their birthday comes in another fortnight.'

David perked up after Anne had dropped us off somewhere near the centre of town and driven off to keep her appointment.

'Do you know an interesting thing about Norwich?' he asked as we stood about on the pave­ment.

I doubted there was one, unless he was referring to its distance from London, but expressed the required ignorance.

188

The Hippopotamus

There are exactly fifty-two churches in Norwich and three hundred and sixty-five pubs/

Is that right?'

'So they say. That means you can get drunk in a different bar every night of the year, and repent at a different altar every week of the year/

The odds, then, were a pleasant six-to-one on that we would stumble across a pub before we encoun­tered a church. Probability took a powder that day however, and I found myself being marched by Davey into the close and asked to admire the flying buttresses and exquisitely proportioned apsidal east end of the great cathedral. The flying buttresses and exquisitely proportioned apse of a great barmaid would have exerted infinitely more powerful a pull, but I allowed myself to be led. I mused that it had in all probability been twenty years since I had last stood inside a cathedral. The smell of the stone and the particular perfection of temperature and atmos­phere, neither warm nor cool, neither dry nor humid, is common to all Norman and Gothic ecclesiastical interiors and contributes much to the mystery and grandeur of such creations. He says.

David took me outside to the cloisters where he showed me the armorial bearings of his mother's family.

'And where do you think your father's ancestors might be recorded?' I asked.

In the Bible, I suppose.'

189

Stephen Fry

'Do you like being the seed of Abraham?'

'You don't count as Jewish if it's only your father, you know.'

'So I believe.'

'The trouble with Jews/ said David, settling himself on a small ledge within an open archway that looked on to the central lawn of the cloister, 'is that they don't have any sense of nature. It's all towns and businesses.'

'Are you talking about Jews in general, or one Jew in particular?'

'Well I think Daddy is actually more rurally minded than most, wouldn't you say?'

He can afford to be, I thought.

Interpreting my silence as disagreement, David folded his arms and thought for a while.

'Why don't you sit down?' he asked at length.

'Do you really want to know?'

'Yes,' he said, surprised.

The reason I don't sit down,' I said, 'is that lately I have been growing the most luscious and luxuri­ant crop of piles.'

'Piles?'

'You must have heard of piles. Haemorrhoids.'

'Oh, haemorrhoids. Yes. Daddy gets those. He has a cream and an applicator. I've seen them in his bathroom cupboard. He says I'll get them one day because piles are a Jewish man's affliction. Piles and mothers. What causes them?'

190

The Hippopotamus

They come with age and sedentary habits. The only cure is to have them lanced with a knife. A cure that is crueller than the disease/

'I thought you said on Thursday night that noth­ing could be cured.'

'Touche, you young sod.'

'You aren't Jewish are you?' asked David after a pause.

'Sadly not. Despite the piles.'

'You are a pretty urban sort of person though, wouldn't you say?'

'Only nor'-nor'-east/ I said. 'I know a fox from a fax machine.'

'Simon thinks Ym the urban one in the family because I don't approve of killing. He says city people have lost all idea of the importance of life, so they concentrate on the importance of death.'

'That sounds to me a little too sophisticated to have come from Simon.'

David laughed. 'Well, he probably read it in the Shooting Times.'

I felt in a pocket for a Rothie. David looked scan­dalised.

'What's the matter?' I said. 'The Victorians used to fit ash-trays in their pews, you know. Sermons were judged by cigar length. A four-inch sermon, a five-inch sermon, a full Corona and so on.'

'Never!'

'Swear to God.'

191

Stephen Fry

Try telling that to a tour-guide/

I conceded the point and went without.

David gazed up at me. 'Do you know why Mummy wouldn't let me go into the stable to tend to Lilac this morning?'

I shook my head.

David sighed and chewed his lower lip. 'She doesn't like me to use . . . she's afraid, you see.'

Afraid?'

'I can . . . sometimes . . . almost. . . I know you'll laugh

'I won't laugh/ I promised. Not audibly, at any rate.

'I can sometimes talk to animals.'

Well, I thought, I sometimes talk to the wall. But I knew that was not what he meant. He meant, of course, that the animals talked back.

My son Roman, who is not far off Davey's age, once claimed that he could understand a mouse he kept in a cage in his bedroom.

'And what does this mouse talk about?' I had asked.

'He tells me how much he would like a friend.'

A feebly transparent plea for another pet mouse, I had thought, and duly shogged off to Horrids to buy one, on the strict understanding that they guar­anteed its masculinity. It occurred to me later that perhaps it had really been a plea from Roman himself. He often grew lonely in London, once the

192

The Hippopotamus

initial excitement had worn off, on those occasions when his mother packed him off to stay with me in school holidays: too young for his sister Leonora

- he had been conceived, after all, as a last-ditch attempt to create something that might hold Helen and me together - too young to accompany me to the theatre, too old to be entertained by a nanny.

It struck me now that, idyllic as Davey's child­hood might seem from the outside, he too had cause to be lonely. He does not share the agricultural or sporting interests of his brother and (presumably) his local age-mates; his manner, while not precisely forbidding, does give off an air of remoteness, of separation from the herd, of - to use Annie's word

- disconnectedness. It is natural for a child of sensi­tivity and intelligence to withdraw. Better to flaunt your independence than risk rejection. Animals are welcome friends because they never judge. Adolescent girls, as is well known, become so infat­uated with their ponies that they have been known to wedge the morning sugar lump in their labia and lie back to have it nibbled from their drooling quims. The unconditional love an animal can offer, love without guilt, rejection, violence or demands, has great appeal for the young. They are of course too stupid to see that even the most intelligent crea­ture does things only for food. Love, for an animal, begins and ends with din-dins.

'So you talk to animals?' I said.

193

Stephen Fry

They trust me. They know I don't want their eggs, or their milk, or their coats, or their strength, or their flesh, or their obedience/

A large number of them want each other's flesh though, don't they? Or do you only talk to vege­tarian animals?'

I could have kicked myself when I saw how sarcas­tic that question had sounded in David's ears. I had meant it quite seriously.

He stood up. 'We are meeting Mummy at the Assembly House,' he said. 'It's a bit of a walk. We should be on our way.'

*

Anne and I sat munching flap-jacks in the tea-rooms of the Assembly House. David had begged to be allowed to trot across the road to the City library.

'I never thought I'd be doing this,' said Annie.

'Doing what?'

'Biting. I had quite made up my mind that I was in for all sorts of terrible injections and fillings.'

'Clean bill of health, then?'

'“If I have teeth like that at your age, Lady Anne, I shall count myself a lucky man.”'

'Double-edged compliment.'

'Any compliment will do at our time of life, don't you find?'

'It's been such a while since I received one,' I said, 'that I can't really answer the question.'

194

The Hippopotamus

'Oh, poor little Tedward. I'll offer you one then. YouVe been in Norfolk only a week and you already look a thousand times better than you did when you arrived/

'That's a compliment to yourself and your hospi­tality, my love, not to me/

'Oh poo, you're quite right. Well, I'll tell you how wonderful it is to have you around, then.'

'Angel.'

'No really, Ted. It is. I do hope you're enjoying yourself. You must say if there's anything you need.'

I opened my hands to indicate that not princes nor popes could provide me with more.

'What about you?' I said. 'A happy bunny?'

'Blissful.'

'No storms on the horizon?'

'Why should you say that?' She frowned a little and became busy with the tea-pot.

'No reason, no reason. I just sometimes think it's a strange life for you. Living in the house you grew up in, but . . .'

'But with a husband from another world? Oh Ted, really! I get the best of everything. My own lot and all the financiers and politicians and artists and writers and odd-balls that Michael attracts.'

'That's a list that would make many in this world vomit.'

'Well, put like that, it does sound rather dread­ful, but I'm so lucky really. Let's face it, I'm not

195

Stephen Fry

awfully bright and Michael is such a good husband. I mean, it would be obscene if someone in my posi­tion complained. Simply obscene.'

I let her pour out another cup for me.

Tm not saying/ she went on, 'that I don't get upset when the newspapers write awful things about him. Comparing him to that ghastly Bob Maxwell, for instance. Calling him a corporate raider or a financial pirate and an asset-stripper. If they knew, Ted! They haven't seen him in tears when he has to sack people.'

Haig used to weep over the casualty lists, I thought to myself. Never stopped him from sending them over the top though, did it?

'He cares, Ted. He's decent. I'm so proud of him. The boys are so proud of him.'

That much is very clear, my love. I'm proud of him too if it comes to that.'

'I mean, Ted, it is enough for me just to be a mother and wife, isn't it? If you can say, at the end of things, that your life's achievement was a family, that doesn't mean you failed. Not everybody has to create things, like Michael and you.'

So Anne was at that stage, I thought. 'I may not have composed the Ring Cycle or founded ICI, but I brought up four children.' Brought up four chil­dren with the help of a quantity of maids, nannies, nurses and hirelings that would have been better employed running a medium-sized boarding school.

196

The Hippopotamus

'My dearest of dear, dear old things,' I said, and I may even have patted her hand. 'Firstly you have to confess that, in fact, you do a great deal. I don't suppose there is a committee, a trust or a charity that doesn't have you on its board. People may laugh at Lady Bountiful, but what you do needs to be done, is done, and couldn't have been done without you.'

'Thank you for saying that, Ted. I must confess one does feel underappreciated sometimes. They have such awful types around on the charity committees and school boards and councils these days. So snide and picky and sneery. They just expect me to smile and nod like the Queen. So often, when I suggest things, I simply get laughed at, as if my job is only to appear on the letter-head and wear a big hat.'

I could picture those meetings all too readily. The ginger-tached, tinted-lensed, cheap-suited, signet-ringed, loafer-shod nobodies suffering from razor-burn and irritable-vowel syndrome who import Korean strimmers or run golf driving-ranges and now populate all the boards and committees and magis­trates' benches of the country, what would they see in this Lady Anne Ponsonby-Smythe-Twistleton-Lah-di? Conservative, Labour or Liberal, they would consider her a useless joke.

'Wouldn't it be lovely,' I could imagine Annie saying brightly, 'to ask the Duchess of Kent to open the borstal's new lavatory-complex?'

Sniggering glances are exchanged and dandruff

197

Stephen Fry

rains down on the agenda-papers as heads shake slowly in disbelief.

'With respect to the lady chairman, that would be highly inappropriate/ says some builder of exec­utive homes, by which he means, 'We'll do the think­ing, thank you, pet. You just shut your posh mouth and sign the frigging cheques/

Poor old darling, committing the crime of doing no more than trying to be nice.

'What you do/ I said, 'is valued. Good God, your family alone! Wouldn't I rather have four fine sons ready to do something in the world, than four flabby poems mouldering in the Oxford Book of Modern Poetry.'

'But you've got children as well!'

'Helen's got them. I'm a Bad Influence. I think I know my godchildren better than I know Roman or Leonora.'

'Ted, that's a terrible thing to say I know you must be a wonderful father, if the way you treat Davey is anything to go by. You treat him as an equal.'

That's conceited of me. I should be treating him as a superior.'

'Oh dear, I do know what you mean. He isn't being a nuisance, is he?'

'Good Lord, as if! I should imagine that child's school reports would compare favourably with those of St Agnes.'

'Do you understand what I was talking about

198

The Hippopotamus

when I said I was worried about him? Am I just being hysterical? You see, it's so difficult for him. Growing up under the shadow of someone like Simon. I sometimes . . . here he is!'

David hove into view, swinging a carrier-bag full of books.

'And what have you two been talking about?'

The characteristics that distinguish the ten-year-old Macallan from the eighteen. I was telling your mother that the ten-year-old, cheaper as it may be, is the better glass.'

'I quite agree,' said David. Saucy thing.

As we walked to the car-park I asked him what he had taken out from the library.

'Oh, just books.'

As it happens, I managed to catch a glimpse of one of the titles when he slung the carrier-bag into the back of the Range Rover.

Staunton's Equine Anatomy was the title. Hah-lah.

That completes my report, for the time being, on Lady Anne, although I would like the chance to quiz her on what she had meant by 'the shadow of someone like Simon'.

5. On no account mess around with Patricia. She is very special and not to be trifled with.

This is unworthy of you in every particular. I ought, I suppose, to be flattered that you imagine Patricia would allow me to 'mess around' with her.

199

Stephen Fry

Or do you imagine that I would stoop to rape? Or in her case, stretch up on tip-toe to rape?

I have no doubt she is 'special'. Who the bloody hell isn't? It's a short step from using the word 'special' to ending conversations on the telephone with 'I love you' instead of the more usual and desirable 'Good-bye' or 'Fuck off, then'.

Your warnings were redundant in any case, for it is she who has been messing with me.

She found me on the hammock after lunch, relax­ing with the Telegraph and a glass of the particular.

'Game of croquet, Ted?'

'Well,' I replied, laying down the paper, 'I can see the hoops, but where are the mallets and balls? Or are we to use flamingos and hedgehogs?'

'They're kept in a trunk in that hut,' she said pointing to the simulacrum of the Villa Rotunda. Hut, for goodness' sake.

I happen to be rather good at croquet. I don't know why this should be, there is no other game at which I am anything less than an embarrassment. I played tennis with Simon yesterday: the boy had only to stand solemnly in the centre of the court and pat the ball gently over the net to have me wheeling, slapping, panting and thrashing like a Newcomen engine. Oliver, who was watching, said the spectacle put him in mind of a windmill tilting at Don Quixote.

The gentle, spiteful art of croquet, however, is

200

The Hippopotamus

more suited to my low centre of gravity and high sense of malice. We played, as is best, with two balls each, I with my fascistic favourites black and red, Patricia taking yellow and blue. My skills took her a little by surprise, I think; she is adept at the game herself, and the first circuit of the lawn was completed in a concentrated silence, broken only by the thlunk-shimm of roqueted balls fizzing out of bounds.

As we approached the final hoops however, Patricia gave up all attempts at winning and became inclined to coze. It seemed she had what I believe is known as an agenda.

Ted, why did you behave like that on Thursday night?'

'Behave like what?'

'You know perfectly well/

Thursday was the night of the big dinner party. As you will see from my chronicle of the event, I behaved in exemplary fashion throughout. As far as I can see, it was Oliver, and to some extent Davey, who crapped in the salad on that occasion, not me. I said as much to Patricia.

'Whatever it is that is going on here,' she said, 'can only be ruined by your scepticism and contempt. You may think it's all very funny, but I should have thought you had more respect for a godchild than that.'

Respect for you, Jane, or respect for Davey? I really was completely lost by now.

201

Stephen Fry

Thoughts, Patricia/ I said, 'as you may imagine, are beginning to burgeon and bubble in the primal soup of my mind, inchoate and confused, like proto-zoic life-forms. Some of the more likely-looking specimens might one day evolve into sentient beings, but for the moment my planet seems to be eons behind everyone else's in the race for civilisation. When you say “whatever it is that is going on here”, you mean precisely . . . ?'

'If you want to sit and snipe from the sidelines, then fine, Ted. But I'm warning you, if you blow it for the rest of us, Til . . . Til kill you.'

'Blow whatT

'Oh, for goodness' sake . . .' Patricia threw down her mallet and glared at me. 'You're just a wart-hog, aren't you? A great fat vicious wart-hog!'

Turning on her heel she stamped off to the house, muttering and choking with emotion. As I watched her go, I became aware of a figure looming towards me from the corner of the lawn. Rebecca approached, a trugful of strawberries on her arm, a broad grin on her face.

'Still the same magical touch with women, Ted?'

'Some people,' I said, bending to gather the croquetballs, 'cannot take defeat.'

'Oh, come now, Ted, it was more than that surely? You tried to goose her while she bent to play the ball.'

'Certainly not,' I replied. 'Nothing can have been further from my mind.'

202

The Hippopotamus

Then you are not Ted Wallace but an imposter and I shall go and ring the police.'

'Well, naturally any bending woman in a short skirt causes some kind of reflex on a summer's day but I assure you it is a reflex buried deep by years of frustration and remains fully under my control.'

Then what was it all about? Come and sit on the steps and tell me everything.'

We sat with the roundhouse behind us.

'What is going on here, Rebecca? Just what the hell is going on?'

'Darling, you've been here longer than I have. You tell me.'

I'm afraid at this point, Jane, I half gave away our little conspiracy.

'Well, it starts for me like this,' I said. 'Bumped into Jane a couple of weeks ago. She knew me, but I felt the completest fool not recognising her.'

'I think we know whose fault that is, darling.'

'Yes, well, whatever. Went back to her place and she told me about the leukaemia and such like.'

'Did you get an earful of God?'

'There was talk of miracles certainly. Something emanating from here, from Swafford. She claims to be . . . well . . . cured.'

'Don't I know it? Ecstatic letters have arrived at Phillimore Gardens praising the Lord and rejoicing in many wonders.'

'Do you believe her?'

203

Stephen Fry

'Like you, that's why I'm here, darling. To find out. As it happens, we share the same doctor, Jane and I.'

'And what does he say?'

'Well, you know doctors. He is surprised by the remission but cautious as cautious can be.'

There definitely has been a remission then?'

'No doubt about that.'

'Hum.' I sat and thought for a space while Rebecca started in on the strawberries.

'But what has any of that,' she asked, 'got to do with Patricia's splendid description of you as a wart-hog, a great fat vicious wart-hog?'

'Does she know about Jane's miraculous recov­ery?'

'Sure to. Best buddies.'

'Who else knows?'

'Search me, darling. It was last June I understand. Simon brought her back prostrate to this house from the Norfolk Show, white corpuscles practically oozing from her pores. Michael and Anne were here of course, Simon and Davey had an exeat from school to celebrate the finishing of their exams, can't be sure who else. Oh, Max and Mary, they were staying at the time, I'm almost sure.'

'So do any of them believe in this miracle?'

'Don't ask me.'

I grabbed a fistful of strawberries and thought for a while.

204

The Hippopotamus

'Well, I don't think Simon believes. He told me the other day about Jane's collapse. Compared her overnight recovery to that of pigs he had known/

'Romantic bugger/

'Oliver on the other hand ... He seems to know something. I'm almost certain he does.'

'If there's truffle, Oliver will snuffle it out, you can be sure of that.'

'And Patricia clearly thinks that I am in on it, but scoffing sceptically up my sleeve.'

'Well, that's certainly how you sounded the other night at dinner, isn't it?'

Rebecca was alluding to a conversation I had with the Bishop and others about 'healing' and 'therapy'.

'You do see, don't you, my dear, that this talk of miracles is preposterous?'

'Well, I know one thing, darling, and that is that Jane should have been dead by the end of June.'

'Why did you never let me know? Why did I only find out by chance that my only god-daughter had leukaemia?'

'Fat lot you'd've cared. It would have taken more than a dying god-daughter to get you to raise your red eyes from the whisky glass. I know what you've been like. Oliver tells me of your exploits. Not that he needs to - I read the newspapers. A glitterati drunkard rampaging around Soho and the West End insulting everyone you meet and sweating your fat arse over a bar-stool with your fellow has-beens,

205

Stephen Fry

puking bile at everyone under fifty and tearing great chunks off hands that dare to feed you/

'Rebecca . . /

'But of course you've been sacked now, haven't you? Suddenly you need your rich and powerful friends to help you out of the tank of bitter piss youVe been drowning in for the last twenty years. You'll slobber with doe-eyed sympathy and moon with paternal concern - why darling, you'll even cut down on your drinking and go boaty-woaty with your godson like a white-haired old saint - so long as underneath you can remain the same cynical, evil-minded old turd that the world knows and loves.'

There, in a nutshell, you have your mother. I suspect I am the only man in this world who has dared to spurn her. It may have been all of two decades ago but to a mind like hers this is no time at all. Revenge for Rebecca is a dish best served ice-cold, nestling in a coulis of vitriol, garnished with sprigs of belladonna and thrown hard into the poor bastard victim's face.

I arose, brushed the strawberry stalks from my lap and walked away, saying not a word.

On my way to the house I collided with Clara the cross-eyed Clifford.

'Good afternoon, Mr Wallace,' she said, 'I was just coming to fetch you.' At least, that is what I think she said. I won't try and emulate her lisp, poor dear.

206

The Hippopotamus

'Oh yes? And why is this?'

She looked steadfastly at me (and at some other unidentified object a hundred and twenty degrees to the west). 'Uncle Michael would like to see you in his study/

The visitor to Lord Logan of Swafford's study is put in mind of Ernst Stavro Blofeld's headquarters. Control consoles, electrically operated curtains and projection screens, telecommunication devices, globes containing whisky decanters and large-screen videophones represent only the visible and identi­fiable elements of gadgetry.

'Choose a city for destruction, Mr Bond. Which is it to be? New York? Leningrad? Paris? No, wait! London! Of course! Goodbye Piccadilly, farewell Leicester Square, as you British are so fond of saying.'

'Ted!' Michael half-rose from his chair, a cigar in his mouth. 'Forgive me for summoning you like a disorderly corporal. I'm awaiting a call from South Africa/

'Business or politics?' Michael is well known for dabbling his hands in the affairs of nation states. Around the walls there are hung photographs of him beaming at the camera in varying postures of intimacy with World Leaders: an arm around Walesa, stiffly side by side by Mandela, toasting Yeltsin with a shot-glass of vodka, sharing a preposterous gilded

207

Stephen Fry

Louis XVI sofa with Arafat, on the golf course with James Baker and George Bush.

'So what's the difference? There's a tobacco company I'm looking at in Johannesburg. South Africa's the coming state, you know.'

'I admire your optimism.'

Michael backhanded away a waft of cigar smoke and with it the reservations of any so small-minded as to doubt him. 'So. Tedward. What do you want to know?'

I didn't understand what he meant at first. Then I saw and a big smile spread across my face. 'You'll do it? You'll co-operate?'

'My lawyers and I receive an absolute right to veto?'

'Certainly.' I nodded vigorously. As if it would ever come to that.

Instantly, Michael pushed across the desk a sheaf of papers, densely type-written in narrow margins, secured with green thread fasteners.

'Read and sign/ he said. 'Initial where I have initialled, full signature where I have signed in full.'

Ah, the ways of the mighty. 'Do I have to read it?' I asked.

'Tedward, so plaintive, like a child with home­work. Your “Ballad of the Workshy Man”, that must have come from the heart. Me, I read documents twenty times this size on the crapper before break­fast.'

208

The Hippopotamus

'No wonder you've got piles/ I said.

4You knew I have piles?' Michael frowned.

'Fellow-sufferer/ I said hastily. 'One sees it in the way you sit down/

'You writers! Not workshy at all. All your work is done observing people.'

Sweet of him to choose to believe that. 'So tell me/ I said, mimicking one of his favourite opening phrases, 'what exactly is in all this?'

'Standard contract for an authorised biography. Rights of injunction. Don't worry, there's nothing that stops you from making full royalties. Talking of which, you owe me one penny.' He opened the palm of his hand and stretched it across the desk.

'I do?' I looked up in surprise.

'In law,' said Michael, 'a contract is meaningless without consideration. Someone must pay some­one. You will see in the document you are signing that in consideration for the sum of one penny, I agree to co-operate in your biography, known here­after as The Material. So. One penny please.'

Fazed by the combination of legalese and earnest­ness, I fumbled in my trouser pocket for a coin.

'Do you have change for a five-pence piece?'

'Certainly.' Michael caught my shilling, opened a drawer, took out a small strong-box, shook inside it with his fingers and drew out two tuppenny bits. 'And four is five/ he said. 'Shake, business-partner. We have a deal.'

209

Stephen Fry

I stood to shake his hand and was disconsolate to see him burst out laughing.

TedwardI Smile! Deals are causes for celebra­tion/

Tm sorry/ I said. 'I think I am overawed by your solemnity/

'It was your first lesson in how we work. Up to the moment of signature and handshake is grim determination. The moment the ink is on the paper and the hands are clasped together, we are locked in an ecstasy greater than love/

Michael placed two tape-recording machines on the desk and pressed their record buttons.

'One for each of us/ he said. 'Just so we know where we stand/

Thus, interrupted only by two calls from Johannesburg, fourteen faxes from there and else­where and a call to tea, we sat while Michael embarked on the story of his life.

I will save the details of the conversation for a long weekend, Jane. Let it just be said that Much Has Become Clear.

This morning however, an oddity.

I slouched in to brekker, hoping to catch the bacon before it had turned to leather in the tureen, and sat myself down, as usual, alone with the Telegraph at the end of the dining-room table.

Patricia came in, flushed and excited.

'Ted1/ she cried. Tm so glad to have caught you.'

210

The Hippopotamus

'Have a coffee/ I said, a little frigidly. I find it difficult to treat a girl who has recently called me a wart-hog with any real warmth of manner, however much I may want to jam my cock up her funnel.

She was not much interested in coffee, however. She had something on her chest. Lucky something.

Ted, I want you to forget everything I said to you yesterday afternoon.'

Ah.'

Tm just so terribly sorry. I really don't know what came over me. I was quite unbearably rude.'

'Not at all, not at all.'

'And I talked such a great deal of nonsense.'

At this point, Simon loomed in looking for Logan, a worried look on his customarily vacant face.

'I think he's working in his study,' said Patricia. 'Anything wrong?'

'Oh, not really. Well, it's Lilac, actually. Dad's hunter. She seems no better. Just wanted to let him know, that's all.'

And off he lumbered, leaving Patricia and me alone once more. She continued with her rather strained apology.

'I can't think why I was so horried to you. I've been under a lot of pressure lately. I think that must be it. You've probably heard that my . . . that Martin, the man I've been living with, he left me. I get very . . .'

211

Stephen Fry

'My dear old girl/ I said. 'Please. Think no more about it/

'I suppose I imagined at that dinner that you were getting at me. All your talk about therapists. Fve been seeing one, you see, and I thought you must have known and were mocking me.'

'Patricia, I would never for a moment . . /

'Well, of course I realise that, now. I lay awake last night thinking what a brute Fd been to you. You were just talking in general. How could you possibly have known?'

'It was entirely my fault for jabbering on in such a thoughtless fashion. I should be apologising to you/

She smiled. I smiled back. Somewhere deep in the trouser region the neglected old worm twitched and wriggled in his sleep.

She kissed me on the cheek. 'No hard feelings?'

'Of course not, my dear/ I lied.

I watched that magnificently constructed arse swing out of the room and allowed those hard feel­ings to subside in my lap. A high arse, ledging out from the coccyx; the kind of arse you can stand a tea-pot on.

But Jane, what the deuce had she been talking about? Didn't fool me for a second. The smile was too bright, the kiss on the cheek too theatrical. I recognise pride thwarted when I see it. She was apol­ogising because she had been told to. Hm. Thinks.

212

The Hippopotamus

I return now to my schedule and address Proclamation the Sixth:

You have talked only about the guests. The house is full of other men and women. There are indoor and outdoor servants, there is Podmore. I have heard noth­ing of them.

What do you want, blood? I am not one of those easy aristocratic types who can walk with kings nor lose the common touch. I'm a tight-arsed bourgeois masquerading as declasse. Give us a break, baby-doll.

Of the servants I know by name I can tell you this. There is Podmore, first name Dick, who looks and behaves more like a disbarred time-share sales­man than a butler, but then that is how all butlers have looked for years now, even in ducal households (as if I really know). Upper servants have lost the knack of seeming to have no provenance, no private life, no family and no sexuality. One look at Podmore and you can surmise all too readily that he was born in Carshalton Beeches, that he flirted with the Teddy Boy movement in the 1950s before moving with his wife Julie to Norfolk (just great to get away from all that traffic and what was then called the rat-race . . .), that he has his eye on a retirement condo hard by a golf course in Florida and that he can't under­stand why Logan hasn't replaced the french windows in the main drawing room with sliding patio doors.

213

Stephen Fry

Not much else to say about him really except that I suspect him of being a closet nance, Mrs Podmore or no Mrs Podmore. He has a way of eyeing Davey up that argues something of the gaysexualist.

Julie Podmore acts as housekeeper, her duties largely comprise bossing the maids shrewishly and lowering her head whenever she passes a house-guest. She is in her fifties, of medium height, weight and fuckability: she dyes her hair. Beyond that I know nothing to her credit or detriment.

The only maid whose name I can remember is called Joanne. I remember her name because she has a combination of ample thighs and noisy tights. As a result she makes a frishing noise whenever she climbs the stairs or walks the corridor. To match the thighs she sports a cantilevered bust: I should imag­ine she has to make an effort to lean backwards at all times in order not to fall over. The other maid is woundingly plain and will never rise in her profes­sion until she learns that guests are unlikely to be interested in her brother's exploits on the speed­way track.

There are kitchen staff into whose eyrie I have not penetrated, but I can tell you that the cook's name is Cheryl and that she bakes a sinful egg custard. Liberality with the nutmeg is the key here, I fancy.

Venturing outside we encounter Alec Tubby, the

214

The Hippopotamus

chief groom. He is stoutly Norfolk and entirely without discernible character. His son Kenny assists him in the muckings-out and rubbings-down around which stable life revolves. He will be a bit depressed at the moment on account of the vet expressing dark forebodings this afternoon as to the chances of Lilac pulling out of her decline.

A splendour called Kate supervises the kennels and, as is traditional with such specimens, presents to the world a handsome beard and moustache. It must take at least a square yard of stout blue corduroy to trouser her arse alone. She is rather fun as a matter of fact, and a pleasure to talk to. She has persuaded me to puppy-walk some of the young hounds, which is a thing that needs doing at this season and which I find highly enjoyable. There is something tirelessly entertaining about the way puppies widdle.

Further afield we find Tom Jarrold, the game­keeper. He is aggressively jealous of his cocks, hens and chicks and can spot a no-good townie like me a mile off. We have little to say to each other. Henry, his assistant, aspires to be no more than a carbon­copy of Tom. Simon seems to be the only person alive who can communicate with either of them. Jarrold has a hare-lipped daughter, Katrina. Not just hare-lipped, actually, but hairy-lipped too. Nature can be unbearably cruel.

The only other member of staff to mention is

215

Stephen Fry

Valerie, Michael's secretary or PA. She keeps herself very much to herself and is only here on certain days. I have not determined if there is a pattern. When she is here she dines alone, in Michael's study, guarding the telephones. This is her choice appar­ently, since she has been offered a place at table amongst persons of rank and tone.

I really am afraid, my angel, that there is noth­ing more I can tell you. But, as required by the last of your dictats, Proclamation Seven, the Four Constants will ever be my guide.

Constant vigilance; constant awareness; constant obser­vation; constant openness.

So rest assured that I shall not cease from mental strife, nor shall Simon's computer sleep by my hand, till we have built Jerusalem in Norfolk's green and peasant land.

Assuring you, madam, of my good faith in this and all matters.

Yours (for Logan-Wallace Biogs Pic)

Ted Wallace (CEO)

216

J 2$ HA 19*2 — 21 fWM Onilo- Ufr\mr% lt4 TO »«S) JJtSS* * tl of §1

Oislow /iteriors

12a Onslow Terrace • South Kensington • LONDON SW7

uRonrr racsnau Twyomssicw

TO: Patricia Hardy, c/o Logan, Swafford Hall, Norfolk Pram: Onslow Interiors Ltd My fax: 071-555 4929 TOUT fax: 0653-378552

For the private and personal attention of Miss Hardy

Dear Miss Hardy,

You suggest in your letter that you might consider making an approach to E.L.W. to raise the question of his recent remarks on the subject we discussed.

We would recommend with »v+ri«» force that you do not make such a move. T. is not an expert in this field and has no knowledge of the details.

I trust this warning has come in time to save you making an unfortunate mistake.

Unable for the moment to join you for meeting as suggested.

Letter follows

Yours

J.S.

2S-09-1992 99 $7 LOGANGROUP pic TO: 9 971 555 4929 tap Stt

LOGANGROUP pic

To..................................................................Jane Swann

Company...........................................Onslow interiors

Fax NO......................................................071 555 4929

From..................................................................Patricia

Fax NO........................................................0653 378552

Page.......................................................................l of l

Jane,

Bother! If your fax means what I think it does, then I've screwed up. Gave Ted an earful yesterday. Called him a foul and ugly old wart-hog. Hard to take those kind of words back but I had a go just now in the breakfast room.

I told him that I've been behaving irrationally on account of Martin leaving me and that I had had a go at him because I thought hfi had been having a go at me. Hunk he swallowed it. He leered what he imagines is a debonair smile and started dripping egg-yolk down his shirt, which I think is a sign of forgiveness.

You really should have warned me though. Does he really not know what's going on? And why are you concerned with what he thinks or believes anyway? He's not here on a commission from a newspaper is he? The mind boggles. Come to think of it, Michael announced last night that Ted is writing his biography. They've been closeted together for hours and hours. What's that all about?

Wildest apologies, do come down soonest

Pat

»youtnoainitrinyafficuto«fl*!hsn

The Hippopotamus

IV

David closed the book and let his eyes lose focus as he gazed up at the ceiling-rose. By eleven o'clock the light had faded enough to silence the chimes of the stable clock. Two hours had passed by since then. In an hour he would be ready. For the moment it was safest, so excited was he, to relax his whole body and concentrate on nothing.

He thought of a circle and within that circle, another circle, within that another and another and another, allow­ing his inner eye to zoom at speed through the endless ring of rings, finding a central glowing spot that in its turn changed into another circle which itself contained yet more and more circles. It was like a dive into the centre of things and diverted the mind from any base or worldly thoughts. The technique came from a book on yogic meditation he had bought last holidays and worked extremely well so long as one was capable of concen­trating with the utmost force while at the same time remaining entirely relaxed.

The time went surprisingly quickly in this state and David already knew, without looking at his bedside clock, when it was two o'clock precisely.

He stood naked before a tall mirror, breathing deeply. The night was warm but he would need some protec­tion. He chose a T-shirt, baggy track-suit bottoms and a pair of trainers. No socks or pants. Taking from the bedside

219

Stephen Fry

table a torch, an apple and a small jar wrapped in sheets of Kleenex, he left the room.

A gibbous moon, he had heard it called. Half and half. Enough light to see, enough dark to conceal. Light was not important, really. In his present state he felt he could accomplish the mission blindfold.

His trainers loomed white beneath him in the shadow of the house and against the greasy black of the grass, white flashes pumping back and forth. Looking up, he saw Orion's belt twinkling on its waist and the dog star spinning blue to the east. The sound of his trainers scuff­ing the grass died in the velvet deep of the night.

'All the air/ he whispered to himself in the rhythm of the running and panting, 'a solemn stillness holds. All the air ... a solemn . . . stillness . . . holds. All the air . . . a solemn . . . stillness . . . holdsV

He was there. The long shadow of the clock fell on the stable yard and a warm savour of horse manure rolled towards him.

Soft as a moth he flitted to the door of the corner tack room. Inside, another smell awaited him, the perfume of saddle-soap and dubbin, so rich that it made him cough. Holding his breath, he felt for the wooden stool, picking it up by the carved hole in the centre of its seat. A loose item of tack, a bridle or unfastened martingale, fell to the ground with a brittle ring as he lifted the stool clear, but he knew that the sound penetrated no ears but his own and those of the horses, who knew what he was up to and approved.

220

The Hippopotamus

He reached Lilac's stall and unlatched the top section of the gate. Lilac, as though she had been waiting, moved her head forward to welcome him.

'Hello/ said David, mind to mind, with no movement of lips and no stirring of breath or vocal cords. Tve brought you an apple/

Lilac took the present, like a patient with no appetite who knows they must eat to keep up their strength. While she was slowly masticating the apple, slewing it from cheek to cheek, David pulled off his T-shirt and slipped out of his track-suit bottoms. Feeling that it was ridiculous to be naked but for a pair of trainers, he took those off too and stood bare in the moonlight.

He shivered a little and felt a colony of goose-pimples start up around his legs.

'Are you ready, old girl?' he asked, again without use of his voice. 'I am.' He stooped to take the jar and its tissue wrapping from the pocket of his track-suit. The torch he could do without.

He exerted the gentlest pressure on Lilac's shoulders as he opened the lower gate and stepped in clutching the stool, but she made no move to make for the open yard. Slowly, he closed both gates together and they were alone in the absolute dark.

She was very peaceful, only a light sweat testifying to her terrible illness. She stood in silence, one rear hoof from time to time clopping the flagstones. David moved down her side, his body touching hers as he felt his way to the end of the stall. The heat from her flanks awoke

221

Stephen Fry

the great heat in him and as he raised himself up on the stool he felt his glans push through the foreskin and his whole cock stand higher and straighter and harder than it had ever stood before. He straightened up on the stool, a hand steadying himself on Lilac's hindquarters, and slowed his lungs to the rhythm of Lilac's own breath­ing. She was oestrous and would not kick back with her legs as she might when off heat. Even had she been, David knew that she would welcome him.

When he was ready and he knew they were as one, he pushed two fingers into the jar and gathered up a thick lump of Vaseline. With his other hand he brushed Lilac's tail to one side. Obediently she gave a twitch and the tail hung high above, leaving him free to work with both hands. Below the dock and anus the outer lips were easy to find and within them he could feel the clitoral hood and below it the soft tissue of the inner labia. Delicately pushing with his finger he found what he thought must be the urethra and gently he traced his finger down to the easy tender squash below. As if to confirm his discovery, Lilac blew gently from her nose and stamped a foot.

David worked the bolus of jelly into the vaginal open­ing, finding that his fingers slipped easily in and out. What Vaseline was left over he used to anoint himself; although he was already supplying himself with his own thin stream of juice.

The cock went in with splendid ease, its straight slicked hardness pulled further through by a quick spasm from

222

The Hippopotamus

Lilac. The wall closed all around to suck him deeper in and David gasped with the blinding joy of what he felt. A hand either side of the root of her tail, he experi­mented tentatively by pulling himself marginally back and pushing himself marginally forward. The sensation blinded his head with stars. A millimetre this way, a millimetre that, hooves thundered in his brain and the hot crystals in his stomach were smashed into billions of burning grains. The absolute Tightness and holiness and perfection and beauty of life charged through him. In this position he could stay for ever, he and the whole kingdom of life - animal, plant or human, locked in a whirlwind of love. The other time it had all been too quick for him to feel this ecstasy: that had been with a woman and there had been tension and the need to talk in words.

'You are whole, Lilac/ his voice inside him called to her. 'With this gift of pure spirit I pronounce you whole and healed.'

The lights in his head spilled and toppled and spun in desperate agony as he pushed and pushed, unable to believe the unsurpassable depth and intensity of the tumult of pleasure that was overwhelming him, and then there flashed one great white sheet of light in his head and he felt the surge of his spirit course and course and course and course and course as though it would never stop.

As he finished, forcing the last drop, the Vaseline jar tumbled to the ground with a clatter and Lilac whinnied

223

Stephen Fry

in alarm, pulling in her great ring of muscle with a bruis­ing clench.

David winced but stayed calm, knowing that Lilac would subside too if he was still. The tension in her flanks eased away and she relaxed the muscle, letting David pull out.

He stood there for a moment, hot hands on her side, exultant and exhausted. At last he stepped down to pick up the wad of tissues that had wrapped the jar and began with care to wipe Lilac down, talking to her all the while.

Out in the stable yard he shivered sharply as he put on his T-shirt. He looked down at the spongy dangle of his cock.

'You must be sparing of this great gift/ he said to himself, Very, very sparing/

224

6

Albert and Michael Bienenstock grew sugar beet in a part of Hungary that in 1919 was redesignated Czechoslovakia. This act of cartographical tyranny had transformed Michael into an overnight Zionist and, inspired by a childish sense of adventure and the inflam­matory writings of Chaim Herzog, he took a boat to Haifa in 1923, under a proud new name, Amos Golan. Golan, Michael had satisfied himself after extensive, and in Albert's view preposterous, researches into family history, was the Bienenstocks' true Israelite patronymic. Golan was a fit name for a man travelling to claim his homeland for his people.

'Sailing into trouble,' said Albert, words with which he was later to mock himself.

Albert's own son was named Michael in honour of his foolish uncle, to the great consternation and scandal of Albert's cousins in Vienna. Tradition held it to be bad luck for members of the same family to share a given name. Albert was not a traditionalist. He had no religion, he had no real sense of Jewishness. He was a farmer and a horseman, closer to the anti-Semitic Magyars of the old Habsburg Empire than to the scholarly gabardine beetles of shtetl and city, who scuttled about the streets

225

Stephen Fry

with their heads down, cravenly hugging the walls when the gentiles walked by as if fearful of catching or perhaps transmitting some terrible disease.

As a young man in 1914, Albert had fought for his Emperor. Rigged up like a chocolate soldier in gleaming cuirass and nodding plume, Albert the Blue Hussar was among the first to charge the Serbian guns in the early weeks when the Great War was a small Balkan affair that nobody believed could matter. Later, the proud troops of horse humbled by the titanic ordnance of the twen­tieth century, Albert was appointed to their reassignment as no more than drays and dispatch ponies, pulling with lowered heads the carriages and ambulances that shuf­fled behind the lines in the frozen Carpathian moun­tains or relaying fatuous messages between staff and field. With ironic resignation he told himself that loyalty to a great moustache in Vienna was no more stupid than loyalty to a great beard in Jerusalem. By the end however, he had seen too many white worms crawling in the eye-sockets of too many dead comrades, and too many living comrades frying up the livers and lights of too many slaughtered Cossacks with baby faces. He exaggerated the symptoms of some light shell-shock he sustained during a bombardment and was happy to be transferred to a remount division in that district of Romania known as Transylvania, where he was to sit out the war process­ing the remnants of the cavalry.

Albert possessed a very special gift with horses. He understood them far better than did the equestrian

226

The Hippopotamus

instructors and veterinary surgeons of the Imperial Army a fact which generated ill-feeling in some of his brother officers. Others preferred to trumpet Alberts skills as a healer, making extraordinary claims which he was always quick to repudiate.

There is nothing so mysterious about what I do/ he said. 'I am patient with the animals. I show them that they are loved. I keep them calm. The rest is up to nature/

Such protestations were so much spitting in the wind. Albert's reputation grew and was even extended to humans, the result of a stupid incident over his batman, Benko. This foolish soldier had allowed his foot to be stamped on by a frightened stallion one afternoon. Instead of reporting the injury immediately to an orderly, Benko had kept quiet and allowed the wound to fester overnight. The next morning, when he hobbled in with the morn­ing coffee, Albert had questioned him.

'Why are you limping so badly, Benko?'

Benko had burst into tears.

'Oh, sirV he cried. 'Would you take a look at it? I daren't go to the surgeon, for I know he will amputate from the knee. He never does anything else.'

It was certainly true that there existed many standing jokes about soldiers who had made the mistake of visit­ing the regimental sawbones. There was one private, they said, who rather lost his head and went to see this doctor with nothing more than a migraine - after which he lost his head completely. This joke worked better in Romanian

227

Stephen Fry

/

than in Hungarian. Another story concerned Jana, the local whore. One day a soldier called Janos had gone to see the doctor with a genital wart. He was never seen again, but Jana set up her stall only a week later.

Understanding Benko's reluctance to make an official appointment, Albert agreed to examine the foot, but could not help wincing with disgust when Benko gingerly pulled off his boot and sock. He was not a hygienic soldier, indeed had not in all likelihood separated that boot from that foot in many weeks. Benko saw Albert's gagging reaction and immediately began to gibber with fear.

'It's gangrene, isn't it, sir? It's gangrene and I shall lose my leg! I know it, I know it.'

There, there, you stupid boy. Let me see.'

'No, no! I'm done for, I'm done for!'

Albert took him by the shoulders and spoke into his eyes. 'Listen to me. You must be very calm now. You must breathe slowly and deeply. Breathe very slowly and very deeply for me.'

Trembling, Benko tried to obey. Albert kept on talk­ing to him, firmly but with kindness, until he was satis­fied that the boy had wound down from his hysteria. Horses were easier, you could communicate such confi­dence without words.

'Now I'm going to look at your foot. Be sure there is no real problem with your foot. It is sore and it smarts, but that is not the end of the world.'

Benko turned his head away in squeamish terror as Albert took a deep breath, stooped and pressed his hand

228

The Hippopotamus

to the swelling, which was purple with poison. Immediately a small splinter flew from the centre of the wound, followed by a jet of pus.

There/ said Albert, 'that's better/

Benko turned round to stare at Albert. 'Better?'

'Yes, I'm sure you will find that your foot will mend now/

'You place your hand on my foot and you say it will mend?'

'No, no, I merely . . /

But it was too late. Around the barracks the rumour flew.

'Benko's foot was black with gangrene . . /

'Bienenstock himself nearly fainted at the stench . . /

'Just put a hand . . /

A hand that seared with heat, Benko says . . /

'Nearly burned him . . /

'Just rested it for a second . . /

'Would have had to amputate from the knee . . /

'Look at the boy now . . /

'Skipping like a terrier . . /

'Bienenstock is a strange man, I've always said so . . /

'Not Christian, you know . . /

'Not even a proper Jew . . /

'Never seen in synagogue, according to Corporal Heilbronn

After a while even Albert himself began to wonder what he had done. He was sure that he had seen that splinter fly, he was sure that the smell he recoiled from

229

Stephen Fry

was nothing more than the Limburger reek of filthy socks, he was sure that his 'skill' lay in no more than the ability to comfort, to comfort in the proper sense, to make strong, to fortify. But the damage had been done, and from that day Albert never knew a moment's ease amongst his men. A horse that he had 'miraculously' nursed to health had later gone mad, throwing a recruit, who broke his back and never walked again. Everywhere that Albert went he saw the sign of the cross or of the evil eye. Then Benko, silly superstitious Benko, made an appointment with his commanding officer and asked to be reassigned to other duties. Serving Captain Bienenstock made him nervous. A week later Benko died after step­ping on a landmine.

'He trod with that foot,' the men said. 'Bienenstock's curse.'

*

Albert's loyalty would never be given again: so he swore when he returned in 1919 to his neglected Hungarian fields, soon to become his neglected Czechoslovakian fields. Michael his brother, who had stayed behind with Imperial blessing to tend those fields that the people of the Empire might have something to sweeten their war, had not been a good farmer. The Zionist bug had bitten him early in the Gentile's Quarrel, as he called it, and he had higher things to think of than the husbandry of, as it were, alien corn.

After Michael's departure, Albert spent the next ten

230

The Hippopotamus

years working to become the largest grower of beet in all of Czechoslovakia. In 1929 he set the seal on the triumphant achievement of this ambition by building a small refinery on his land and marrying the daughter of his foreman, a small girl with brown eyes and lustrous hair. Within a year she bore him a son, Michael, and in the spring of 1932 perished in the delivery of a daugh­ter, Rebecca. Albert tried, but he could not save her. Grieve as he might, he could still reflect that it was perhaps as well that he had not succeeded in nursing her back to health after the doctors had pronounced her all but dead. His reputation as an unholy sorcerer had followed him back home and even rabbis, who were supposed to be above the credulous herd, shunned his society.

Albert needed no one. He had proved his point. He was a superb agriculturist. Now, alone with his two tiny children, his wide fields of beet and his sugar refinery, he yearned to leave the country that was no longer his own. Besides Yiddish and Hungarian, his mother tongues, he had had to learn German and Romanian for service in the Hussars and since then the languages of his new government, Czech and Slovak.

'I am leaving before Prague is taken over by the French,' he told his factotum, Tomasz. Albert held, all his life, a peculiar horror of the French tongue, unaccountably believing it to be far more difficult to master than any other in Europe.

But how could Albert leave? Who would buy his beet

231

Stephen Fry

fields? Who would give him a good price for a private refinery? Where would he go? Many in his village spoke of America, but America meant only New York; Jews were not welcome in the farmlands. Albert's brother Michael, or rather Amos, urged him by letter to come and join him in Palestine, where he and his new wife Nora had given the world a pair of brand new sabra chil­dren, Axon and Ephraim, who were growing up to be the new Jews of the new Jerusalem.

After all, you're something of a sabra, yourself, Albert,' he wrote.

Albert was puzzled by this remark. A Jew could only call himself a sabra, he had understood, if he was born in the land of Israel. A learned friend explained Amos's meaning.

'Your brother is making a friendly joke, Albert. “Sabra” is also a word for a kind of fruit. A prickly pear, spiky on the outside but sweet and soft on the inside.' As good a description of Albert as anyone ever found. He had been forced to be prickly however, for his estate was large and took a great deal of energy and skill to run, with markets so deeply corrupt, inflation so crazily high and the people so grindingly poor. He had been forced to be prickly because his real, calm, loving and rational self was mistaken for the black soul of a hypnotic wizard.

A week after this letter from Amos had arrived, Adolf Hitler was elected by the German people to be their new Chancellor. Albert was disappointed. Hitler did not seem to him to be a suitable leader for the Germans;

232

The Hippopotamus

the anti-Semitism, he supposed, like everybody's anti-Semitism, was an unpleasant noise that meant very little. Albert was rarely bothered by anti-Semitism. He had often felt a little that way himself when he heard Hasidim sounding off on the subject of the law or Amos and his friends sounding off on the subject of Zion. It was not that Albert was ashamed of being Jewish, it was rather that he was damned if he was going to make a big fuss about it. He was a father and a farmer, that was all.

Another week later a very surprising thing happened. An English gentleman arrived at Albert's house, accom­panied by an interpreter from Prague. Albert was beside himself with excitement to have a real Englishman within his walls. Of all the peoples of the world the English were quite his favourite. It had been a matter of great relief to him that he had not come into any hostile contact with them during the course of the war, for he was sure that he would have been greatly tempted to cross the lines and join them. He liked their formality, their tweed suits, their respect for horsemanship, their ironic humour and their lack of show.

Albert seated the Englishman and the interpreter in leather chairs in his study. He rang for Tomasz, his servant.

The gentleman will take tea?' he asked the inter­preter. He hoped that the Englishman would not think that his ringing for a servant amounted to ostentation. It really was perfectly usual for Albert to drink tea at this hour and for Tomasz to be summoned by a bell and commanded to prepare it.

233

Stephen Fry

Tea would be delightful; my dear sir/ the translator replied in grand Hungarian. He seemed to Albert to be attempting to out-anglify the Englishman with his pre­war pomposity and pre-war whiskers.

Once tea was poured, Albert sat politely upright and waited for the purpose of this visit to be revealed. Sipping from his cup as though he were attending the smartest party on the smoothest lawn in Berkshire, the English gentleman delivered himself of a short sentence and then cocked his head good-naturedly towards the interpreter. The voice was light and pleasant, with soft Vs and a gentle falling inflection. The interpreter smiled broadly and declared:

'Mr Bienenstock, I represent His Majesty's Government in London.'

What splendid words! Albert's head became dizzy with excitement, then dizzier still as, over the next hour, the Englishman explained his mission.

The British Empire - another splendid phrase! - was deeply sensible, the Englishman said, of her complete dependence upon the cane sugars that originated in her far dominions of Australia and the West Indies. Were there ever to be another war in Europe - and the Englishman protested that this eventuality was held by his masters to be quite discountably remote - naval tacti­cians were of one mind in their agreement that the seas that bounded the British shores might be all but cut off from vital supplies of hot-weather commodities, of which sugar was the most vital . . . well, after tea perhaps. The

234

The Hippopotamus

British had never in all their long history - really a most unpardonable oversight - grown sugar beet on any domes­tic basis. They had no expertise on the subject whatso­ever. That it could be grown was not a matter that admitted of the least doubt. Sugar from cane, they were fully aware, was not a realistic possibility, owing to their weather, which Mr Bienenstock doubtless knew was capricious to a nationally celebrated fault. Sugar beet however, the staple of Mr Bienenstock's fertile native plains, seemed perfectly suited to the British climate. It was after all, was it not, akin to the carrot, the turnip and - one must assume - the beetroot? The British farmer was known for the splendour of his carrots, his turnips and his beetroots; surely the cultivation of their close cousins Beta Rapa and Beta Vulgaris could not be beyond him? The Ministry did feel, however, that some­one was needed to guide them, a man who knew all aspects of the vegetable, as it were from field to sugar-bowl. Mr Bienenstock's name had been put forward to Ministry representatives in Prague as being one of the most authoritative in the sugar world. Would Mr Bienenstock consider making the journey to England, in two years' time, to counsel and instruct the ignorant farmers there, to manage test beds, to supervise refinery construction and to oversee Britain's first tentative production of the crop? To use a meteorological metaphor, the British Isles were in drought and needed a man like Mr Bienenstock to shower them with his knowledge and expertise. Her Majesty's Government would pay a generous salary for

235

Stephen Fry

this work and take pleasure in defraying any such expenses in the matters of travel and resettlement as might arise. The English gentleman himself was in no doubt that should Mr Bienenstock be desirous of such status, he could during this time apply to become a full subject of King George and be assured of a favourable outcome.

The government of this same majesty would also be pleased, subject to Mr Bienenstock's agreement, over the next two years to buy, at a fair market price, all his fields and his refinery in Czechoslovakia and to send out a number of British agriculturists to experience with him two full cycles of the beet, in growth, harvest and refine­ment. The government of Czechoslovakia was most anxious to help in this matter, Britain's friendship with the vigorous young democracy being an established fact in a fickle world, a relationship to be relied upon in these trying times for Europe.

The Englishman and Czech translator would leave Mr Bienenstock now to digest this proposal. His decision could be given over the next few weeks. Really most excellent tea. The best the Englishman had tasted on the Continent. Good afternoon to you, Mr Bienenstock. Such charming children.

If Albert had got down on his knees and covered his head to beseech God to grant him all that he desired he could not have framed a prayer that so exactly delin­eated his requirements. Albert managed to maintain his dignity enough not to reply there and then, sending word to Prague three days later that he would be pleased

236

The Hippopotamus

to assent to the English gentleman's scheme and that he was looking forward to offering his hospitality to the agricultural experts London chose to send out to him.

The English farmers, Mr Northwood, Mr Aves and Mr Williams, arrived later that year. They impressed Albert as being both intelligent and respectful, proving themselves attentive and exceptionally apt pupils in the art of sugar. Harry, Paul and Vic, as they insisted they be called, were kind to Michael and Rebecca, who responded by taking to English as though the language had been planted inside them at birth and had been only waiting for this one chance to flourish. Albert picked up the spirit and substance of the language very quickly too, but suffered great teasing from young Michael, who could not understand his father's inabil­ity to master its textures.

'No, Father. It's not “Wick Villiams” or a “vunderful willage”. It's “Vic Williams” and a “wonderful village”.'

'I can't say those letters.'

That's mad!' Michael would hoot, outraged by such absurdity. If you can say “Villiams” and “willage”, of course you can say Williams and village.'

'Old weterans stick to old vays,' Albert would say with deliberate cussedness.

During those two exciting years for the Bienenstock household, all the talk was in English and of England. The visitors spoke of pubs and clubs, of cricket and soccer, of Oxford and Cambridge, of Leslie Howard and

237

Stephen Fry

Noel Coward, of crossword puzzles and fox-hunting, of Huntley and Palmer biscuits and Mazawattee tea, of the BBC and the GPO, of Guy Fawkes Night and Derby Day, of the Prime Minister of Mirth and the Prince of Wales. Albert unearthed in a bookshop a copy of Der Forsyte Saga von John Galsworthy and found himself grow­ing ever impatient to become part of this kindly, ordered world with its town-squares and sea-side hotels, its cosy fogs and rattling taxis, its politicians in top-hats and duchesses in white gloves.

On the boat over from Bremerhaven (one last look at poor Germany and poor, poor Europe), while Rebecca was being sick over the rails, little Michael raised the subject of their names.

'Harry says . . ! every statement of Michael's for the last year had begun with those words, 'Harry says that English people might laugh at the name Bienenstock. Harry says it sounds like a kind of bean soup/

'Oh dear/ said Albert. 'We don't want people to laugh at our names. We must think of something else.'

It was a year later, when they were already well settled in just outside the town of Huntingdon, that Michael himself came up with the splendid idea. His best friend at kindergarten was called Tommy Logan and Michael, writing Tommy's name many times all over his exercise book, as best friends do, noticed that 'Logan' was really 'Golan' rearranged.

Albert was delighted. 'Logan,' he kept repeating to himself, 'Logan . . . Logan . . . Logan.'

238

The Hippopotamus

'You see, Father!' said Michael. 'We have made an Anglo version of GolanV

Six months later the two children walked with their father from the Naturalisation Department of the Home Office towards the Lyon's Corner House in Trafalgar Square.

'Uncle Amos will be so pleased/ said Albert Logan, subject of the King.

Tommy Logan's reaction however, back at the Huntingdon kindergarten, had been one far removed from pleasure.

'You've stolen my name!' he howled. 'You horried Jew, you've stolen my name. How dare you! I'll never talk to you again, you stinking Jew.'

'However did they know that you are Jewish?' Albert had wondered when Michael related this falling-out to his father.

'Miss Hartley told them on my first day,' Michael said. 'She said that everyone was to be nice to me, because decent people have forgiven us for killing Christ.'

'Is that so?' said Albert and a small furrow appeared on his brow.

But furrows were not for Albert's forehead, they were for his fields. The government test beds in Huntingdonshire were the sensation of the day and for a short season the talk of England.

'BRITAIN TO BEET THE WORLD!' a page-five head­line in the Daily Express had declared above a photo­graph of Albert and a government agriculturist standing proudly in front of their 'experimental' acres.

239

Stephen Fry

This unprepossessing vegetable, no more in reality than a turnip with a sweet tooth, could be the key to Britain's future prosperity/ a leader writer declared.

The members of the British public were less sure.

'Will sugar from beet be purple?'

'Can it be turned into proper English cubes?'

'Is it more fattening?'

'Will it taste of soil?'

'Can beet be baked in a pie?'

'Can I grow it in the garden and make my own sugar?'

'Is it fair on the colonies?'

'You can bet they won't be serving it in the Tate Gallery tea-rooms.'

Over the next four or five years, the smiling Hungarian in tweed plus-fours toured the south coast and East Anglia in his holly-green Austin, bestowing government grants and agricultural advice on puzzled but welcoming farm­ers. Michael and Rebecca continued with their studies at Miss Hartley's kindergarten in Huntingdon, a town to which Albert was by now greatly attached, despite initial misgivings.

'Oliver Cromwell?' he had cried, when first he had heard. 'Oliver Cromwell came from here? The king-killer?'

He simply could not believe that the otherwise loyal and respectable townspeople of Huntingdon could be so sincerely proud of their wicked son, that disgrace to English history, the British Lenin. In time however, he learned to forgive the Lord Protector who was, after

240

The Hippopotamus

all, a gentleman farmer like himself and had been pushed by dread circumstance, not by Bolshevism or bloodlust, into the events that led to that awful January morning in Whitehall. The people of Huntingdon, in their turn, learned to love the strange Czechoslovakian with the charming manners, perfect English children and in­explicably Scottish surname. They were less sure about the refinery whose construction he had supervised and which he now ran. It gave off a sickly smell of burnt peanut-butter which would hang over the whole town on windless days. The creation of a second refinery in Bury St Edmunds gave young Michael his first lesson in management technique, however, and can be thanked for that.

One rainy afternoon, when Rebecca and Michael were playing on the floor of their father's study, an engineer came to call on Albert. He left a 600-page report, full of technical drawings and scientific data, which he was anxious for Mr Logan to approve.

Michael watched that evening as Albert sat with the report on his lap.

'Have you got to read all that?'

'Read it? What do I know from pressure-gauges and amps? This is what I do.'

Albert riffled his thumb through the pages of the report and opened a page at random. With a red-inked pen he underlined a few words and flipped through to another page where he circled some numbers, writing a large question mark in the margin. He did this four or five

241

Stephen Fry

times before scrawling at the bottom of the last page the words, 'Can the sub-station take the extra load?'

Michael happened to be outside the study a week later when the engineer called again.

'I've checked and checked and checked the figures you queried, Mr Logan, and so have my colleagues, but we're blowed if we can find any error/

'Ah. I'm so sorry, my dear fellow. I must have made a mistake. I should not have been doubting you.'

'Well, we do like to be through, sir. We were pretty sure about the sub-station too. Then, you'll never guess, but the contractors telephoned to say they had made a miscalculation with their tolerances. They should have been greater by ten per cent/

After Albert had shown the grateful and admiring engineer from the house, he addressed Michael, whom he had seen lurking in the corridor.

'You see? Now they have checked so many times that everything is sure to be fine/

'But the sub-station? How did you know?'

'Sometimes you make a lucky guess. Believe me, you can always rely that sub-stations cannot take the load and you can always rely that another man's pride will do much of your work for you.'

II

One day, it was during the holidays, the very week before Michael was due to start his first term at boarding school

242

The Hippopotamus

in Sussex, Albert summoned the children to his study. He was looking very serious and spoke in Hungarian, a sure sign of distress.

'I have just had a letter from your Uncle Amos/ he said. It means that I shall have to go away for a little while. This is a good time for me to take a holiday. You, Michael, will have to go early to your new school. I have telephoned the headmaster and he will be happy to look after you. You will stay at home, Rebecca, and be looked after by Mrs Price/

'What is it, Father?' asked Michael. 'What has happened?'

'Our cousins living in Vienna, your Uncle Rudi, your Uncle Louis and your Aunts Hannah and Roselle and all the children, they would like to leave Austria and come to England. I can help because I have my British pass­port. But I must go there myself. A tiresome necessity, but a necessity all the same/

The next day Albert had gone to London to see his old friend in the Foreign Office, the English gentleman who had visited him in 1933. Albert forbore from making any reference to Britain's 'firm friendship with your vigor­ous young democracy', the 'established fact in a fickle world' of which the gentleman had spoken on that after­noon in Czechoslovakia. It was not for Albert to ques­tion Mr Chamberlain's tea-party with Hitler.

The gentleman from the Foreign Office listened to Albert's story and confessed the matter to be a little out of his sphere. He recommended a man he knew in another

243

Stephen Fry

department and was kind enough to write Albert a letter of introduction.

The man from the other department, perhaps because his name was Murray had not taken to this Logan with a middle-European epiglottis.

'Really sir, I am not sure what you mean by “taking a stance”. We have a large number of British Jews like yourself coming here every week, all making represen­tations of this nature. I say to all of them what I am going to say to you. There are wheels within wheels. You must understand the precarious state of diplomacy currently obtaining on the continent of Europe. After recent hard-won successes in Munich, His Majesty's Government is hardly in a position to make demands on Germany as that long-suffering country struggles to express a coherent sense of her national identity and establish a proper place at the world's table. It is precisely the sort of hysterical rumour-mongering that you and your fellow . . . that you and your fellows are engaged in that can upset the delicate balance of negotiations and threaten peaceful relations.'

'But my peaceful relations are already being threat­ened,' said Albert with the unselfconscious wordplay that only a non-native speaker of English can achieve.

'Really! If you insist on founding your understanding of a power such as the new Germany on the hearsay of a brother in Jerusalem . . .'

Albert knew enough to hold his tongue in the pres­ence of a triumphalist Munichois.

244

The Hippopotamus

'You are of course free to travel where you will, Mr “Logan”, but I must warn you that if you transgress any law of the German Reich you cannot expect protection or immunity from us. I would recommend that you wait a little while. If your family is sincere about coming to England they must satisfy firstly the requirements for emigration laid down by their home government/

'But they have no home government, sir!' Albert cried, sounding, he was painfully aware, exactly like the kind of whining Jew that he and much of the world most despised.

He never told Michael or Rebecca how completely his faith had been shattered by the indifference and disapproval that he met at the hands of His Majesty's Government that day and on the four days following, as he wore out the waiting-room chairs of Whitehall and the patience of the few functionaries who consented to see him. Had he lived to see the Battle of Britain and the Blitz, Michael persisted in believing, Albert's belief in the British might have been at the very least partially restored. Michael was to find out later from Uncle Louis the full extent of his father's disillusion and despair during that painful week, as he was to find out the details of all that followed.

Arriving in Vienna, Mr Albert Logan, famed grower and refiner of beet, summoned his cousins by messenger to the hotel he had chosen to favour with his custom. Here he met his first reversal, here the sharp point of the Truth began to press against his new-grown English hide.

245

Stephen Fry

The messenger returned half an hour later with a letter. Albert took some notes from his pocket with which to pay the youth and was astonished to see the money being snatched roughly from him without a word of thanks.

'Steady there, young fellow/ said Albert in his most patrician officer's Viennese.

The messenger spat on the carpet, a fleck of yellow spittle landing on Albert's shining brown brogues. 'Jewlover/ he said with contempt and stalked from the room.

Albert shook his head with disbelief and opened the letter. Now the sharp point of the Truth pierced the skin and started to push through. His cousins could not attend such a meeting, they explained with profuse apology. In order to comply with the laws of Austria under the recent Anschluss, they were obliged to wear yellow stars on their coats. Persons with yellow stars on their coats, they assured Albert, were not allowed inside hotels like the Franz Josef.

Mohammed took a cab to the mountain. Cousins Louis and Rudi and their families were all crowded together in one small room in a part of the town that Albert, who knew Vienna well from his old days in the Hussars, had never thought to visit. He was shocked to see them, shocked beyond bearing, more shocked than he had ever been before. The white worms in the eye-sockets of his comrades and the frying livers of the young Cossacks had not shocked him more: in this small room the sharp

246

The Hippopotamus

point of the Truth finally forced itself deep inside him until it tore at the walls of his heart. Albert leant on his Swaine, Adeney and Brigg's umbrella and cried like a baby for a full quarter of an hour while his cousins clus­tered about him in concern.

Albert had known and then forsworn loyalty to the Emperor Franz Josef, whose cavalry he had loved; he had known and now forswore loyalty to two King Georges and a King Edward, whose country and people and history he had revered. In that awful little room with its impon-derably hateful smell, a smell that took all the dignity and colour and strength away from his family and all the dignity and colour and strength away from him, his tweeds, his expensive luggage and his small blue pass­port, in that dreadful stinking room he swore a new loyalty, to his people - his stupid, moaning, helpless and cosmically irritating people, whose religion he scorned, whose culture he despised, whose mannerisms and prej­udices he abominated.

*

With lies, with cunning, with the use of old army contacts and above all, of course, with the use of money, Albert procured the papers necessary to allow his cousins to leave Vienna. Besides Louis, Rudi, Hannah and Roselle, there were four children, Danny, Ruth, Dita and Miriam. He took them by train to Holland and thence by boat to Harwich in England. He stayed in Huntingdon long enough to introduce them to Rebecca and her nanny

247

Stephen Fry

Mrs Price, and then he drove down to Sussex to call on Michael's headmaster, Dr Valentine.

'Here is money enough to pay for his schooling for the rest of time,' he said. 'You shall see it please that he acquires an excellent scholarship to his public school/

'Well, I think that rather depends, Mr Logan, on how intelligent the boy is and with what diligence he applies himself to his work. Scholarships are hardly something you can . . .'

'Michael is most intelligent and most hard-working. I will see him now please.'

A boy was dispatched to fetch young Logan.

While they awaited him, Albert addressed the head­master once more. 'Another thing to say, Dr Walentine. It is possible that you may imagine my son and myself are Jewish people.'

'Really, Mr Logan, I had given it no . . .'

'It is to understand that we are not Jewish people. Michael is not a Jewish boy. He is a Church of England boy. I am going away into Europe now, but I have friends here in England. If it arrives in my ears that any one single person of the school suggests or makes it said that Michael is a Jewish boy it is possible that I shall come back to take him away and that I strike you with my fists, Dr Walentine, with strength enough to kill you.'

lMr Logan!'

'Here he comes now. We shall go to a walk, he and me . . . him and I.'

248

The Hippopotamus

The flabbergasted Dr Valentine was left to ponder this alarming threat while Michael showed his father the lake, the pony paddocks, the cricket field and the woods where he and his friends played cowboys and Indians.

Albert spoke in a mixture of Yiddish and Hungarian. Michael replied in English.

'You are seven years old now, Michael. Plenty old enough to know the facts of the world/

'It's all right, Father. I've already been told/

'You've been told?'

The man wees inside the woman and she has a baby. Wallace told me. He's the senior boy in my dorm.'

'What a child. I'm not talking about those facts, which you can tell your friend Vollis, have nothing to do with urination. I am talking about the real facts.'

'The real facts?'

'Tell me, Michael Logan. What is your country of birth?'

'Hungary,' said Michael, puffing up his chest.

'NO!' Albert turned and gave his son a violent shake. 'Not correct. Tell me again. What is your country of birth?'

Michael stared at his father in amazement.

'Czechoslovakia?' he suggested, frightened.

'NOV

'No?'

'No! You come from England. You are English.'

'Yes, of course, but I was born . . .'

'You were born in Huntingdon. You grew up in Huntingdon. What is your religion?'

249

Stephen Fry

Michael had never seen his father like this before. So strong and so angry. 'Church of England?'

'YES!' Albert kissed him. 'Good boy. You have the idea. You must never, ever, upon pain of your life and my eternal curses, tell a living soul that you are Jewish. Do you understand?'

'But why not?'

'Why not? Because the Germans are coming, that is why not. They will tell they are not coming, but believe me they are coming all the same. The Nazi Germans are coming and they will take anyone away who is Jewish. So you are not Jewish and your sister is not Jewish. You know no Jews, you see no Jews, you have conversation with no Jews. You are Michael Logan of Wyton Chase, Huntingdon. Your uncles and aunts from abroad live with you. They are Lutheran Christians.'

'And you live with me too, of course.'

'Of course,' said Albert. 'I live with you too. Of course.'

Six months later Michael had received a letter with an exotic postmark.

'Jerusalem!' one of his friends shouted. 'Logan's got a letter from Jew-rusalem.'

'My uncle's with the army in Palestine,' Michael said nonchalantly. 'The Mandate, it's called.'

'Logan's a Jew!'

'Bloody am not!'

'Miserly jewy Jew!'

'What's going on here?'

Michael turned in fear as Edward Wallace shouldered

250

The Hippopotamus

his way to the front of the press. Wallace was a senior boy and known to be capable of merciless mental bully­ing.

'Loganstein's got a letter from Jew-land/

'He's a Jew. You can tell. Look at his nose/

'He's a Roundhead, that's for sure.'

Roundheads, in school slang, meant those who were circumcised, as distinct from Cavaliers, who were not.

Wallace looked down on Michael, his eyes darting wickedly back and forth across the boy's face as if coming to a decision. Michael braced himself. His mouth was dry and he felt faint with apprehension.

Wallace spoke at last. 'Don't be stupid,' he said. 'Logan's not a miserly Jew, he's a miserly Scot like me. And I happen to know, Hutchinson, that you are a Roundhead too and what's more your nose is bigger than anyone in the civilised world's. It's so big in fact, that there's talk in the papers of East End children being evac­uated into your left nostril until the end of the war.'

A tidal wave of mocking laughter swept over Hutchinson at this and Michael had to clamp his muscles tight to avoid wetting himself with relief. Wallace turned to him with a sly smile.

'Bags I have those stamps, McLogie, I collect 'em.'

Michael tore the corner from the envelope and handed them over with a beam of gratitude. Wallace clipped him round the ear and told him not to grin at him like a monkey or he'd kick him in the slats.

'Sorry, Wallace.'

251

Stephen Fry

Michael had then run to the school rears to read the letter in private. It was from his Uncle Amos. To this day he regrets never having read it more closely. The quick­est glance was all he would allow himself before tearing it into tiny shreds and flushing it down the lavatory.

All he would ever be able to recall of the letter were a few phrases. Uncle Amos wrote that Michael's father had been shot by the Nazis two days after Chamberlain had declared war on Germany. Something about Berlin. Something about living in the ghettos and spreading warmth. Albert Golan was a hero of the Jews and a great man. Moisha Golan, his son, should be very proud and should always remember.

The next day Uncles Richard and Herbert, as Louis and Rudi now called themselves, came to pick Michael up from school.

Ill

All the money had gone, naturally. All the money from the sale of the farm in Czechoslovakia, all the money earned from his work over the last few years for the Ministry, all the money raised against his interests in the two refineries. Michael's next three years at Dr Valentine's prep school were assured. After that . . .

'I shall certainly get a scholarship,' said Michael. And I shall get a job in the holidays and pay for Rebecca's schooling too.'

'You aren't yet ten years old, Michael,' said Aunt

252

The Hippopotamus

Roselle, now Aunt Rose. 'We will pay for your school. We all have work, we will look after you both. We will be proud to have you as a son and daughter.'

Michael had found jobs however. Every day of his school holidays was engaged in earning money. Firstly he had worked for a bakery in Huntingdon as delivery boy and then, after his scholarship took him to public school, he called the family together and made a suggestion.

'Mrs Anderson is getting very old/ he said. 'She wants to sell her shop. Why don't we buy it?'

'How could we afford to do such a thing?'

'We can sell this house and be able to live over the shop. I've made enquiries. There is room enough for all of us. It's a tight squeeze - Rebecca, Ruth, Dita and Miriam will have to share a room, Danny and I will sleep behind the counter - but we can manage.'

Logan's Sweets and Smokes was known in the family as Michael's Shop. Michael did the books, having the most mathematical turn of mind in the family. He under­stood coupons and the rationing system, he understood how to barter and he understood how to keep customers loyal.

One evening Aunt Rose knocked on his bedroom door.

'Michael, it's Happidrome on the wireless. What are you doing there? Come downstairs.'

She opened the door and saw Michael holding a large book.

'This is my customer book,' he explained. 'Every time a customer comes into the shop I talk to them and find

253

Stephen Fry

out what they like. I list their favourite tobacco, or ciga­rette, or brand of sweets, and each night I make sure I have learnt it. Take the book. Ask me.'

A bewildered Rose had opened a page and offered the name 'Mr G. Blake'.

'Godfrey Blake/ said Michael, 'lives in the Godmanchester Road and smokes forty Player's Weights a day. He buys one packet of Craven A a week for his wife, who only smokes at weekends. He has a son in the army in North Africa and a daughter in the WAAF. He's an assistant ARP warden, injured his hip at Passchendaele and is secretly in love with Janet Gaynor. He has a weakness for humbugs and I always give him one or two if he's out of coupons. He gives me half a crown for cleaning his car on Sundays.'

'WooshV said Aunt Rose. 'Mr Tony Adams?' 'Wing-Commander Anthony Adams,' said Michael, 'flies a desk at RAF Wyton. He has a sweetheart named Wendy, a land-army girl working near Wisbech, and he rides there to see her twice a week on his motor-cycle. He smokes Parson's Pleasure ready-rubbed, which they don't sell in the Officers' Mess, and he likes aniseed balls for himself and Fry's Five Boys chocolate for Wendy.' 'Michael. Why have you learnt all this?' 'Because these people smoke and eat sweets. The first time Mr Blake came into the shop he was just passing. Now he walks the extra half-mile to us twice a week. When the business grows after the war, people like that will be important.'

254

The Hippopotamus

'When the business . . . ? Listen to him. Michael, it's just a shop/

'It's a seed; Aunt Rose. Now, I have to go back to school next week. You and Aunt Hannah will be look­ing after things weekdays. I will leave this book for you. See if you can try to learn everything in it too. Everyone should know it off by heart - Danny Dita, Miriam, everyone - so when they help out at weekends and after school they can make the customers feel impor­tant.'

In the family's eyes, Michael's destiny was as inevitable as if he had been born Prince of Wales. He was a force and that was that.

During subsequent school holidays, as the war came to a close, so the proper expansion of the business, the full germination and growth of the seed, began. A paper round was added, early-morning work for Danny and his sister and cousins; bread, potatoes, flowers and an increas­ing range of tinned foods began to crowd the shelves of the small retail area until Michael and Richard decided that it would be worth their while to buy the house next door, knock through the party-wall and create a small version of a Home and Colonial Store.

In 1947 Michael won a scholarship to Cambridge which he turned down.

'We can really concentrate on things now,' he said.

A call-up the following year to National Service could not be turned down however. His old protector from prep school, Edward Wallace, who had deferred service

255

Stephen Fry

until after Oxford where he was now finishing, persuaded him to join him in applying to the Royal Norfolk regi­ment.

'Not a very smart outfit, which is perfect as we'll be cocks of the roost. Plenty of time for race-meetings and women.'

One afternoon, during his officer training in Wiltshire, Michael read a short story by Somerset Maugham which gave him the idea he had been looking for. It concerned a young man who found himself in need of a packet of cigarettes in a Midlands town one afternoon. He walked along the streets searching for a tobacconist: the better part of a mile he walked before he found one. Instead of going on his way and thinking no more about it, as an ordinary person might, this young man retraced his steps to the place where he had first stood. 'I shall open a tobacconist's here/ he said to himself, 'there is clearly a need.' His shop was a magnificent success. 'How child­ishly simple,' thought the young man. For the next twenty years he travelled Britain walking the streets looking for cigarettes. Whenever he had to walk far, there he would open another shop. He was a millionaire by the age of thirty-five.

'Well, Tedward,' said Michael to his friend Wallace, 'God bless Mr Maugham.'

'Don't you think,' said Wallace, 'that others might have tried it first?'

'What you have to understand, Tedward, is that “others” don't try anything. They leave it to people like us.'

256

The Hippopotamus

'You can count me out, darling one/ said Wallace. 'Sounds like work.'

A year and a half later Michael met Lady Anne Bressingham, which gave him something to work towards. She was eleven when they met and Michael not quite twenty but he knew as surely as any man ever knew a thing that she would grow into the woman for him.

Wallace accused him of being a pervert.

'No, no, Tedward, you don't understand. It is in the smile. She has the right smile. At the moment she is a bony girl, but I know what she will become. It is never the eyes alone, or the beauty, or the figure, it is always the smile. When she smiled I knew at once. It is that clear.'

By 1955, Wallace had cause to remark that Logan news-agent-tobacconists were as familiar a sight in every English high street as dog-turds and Belisha beacons.

'Clothes rationing will end soon/ said Michael. 'People will want good, well-made clothes, brightly coloured and cheap. These new teenagers will want jeans from America. It is time we looked into the matter.'

At a party in 1959 to celebrate the publication of Edward Lennox Wallace's Odes of Fury, Logan took the rising poet aside.

'I'm going into publishing, Tedward. We've bought APC Magazines Ltd. What do you think of that?'

'Women's magazines and children's comics.'

'Chiefly. But we have other titles too. New Insights, for instance.'

257

Stephen Fry

'New Insights is older than God and just as dead/

'So tell me, who should I employ to nurse it back to life? They say Mark Onions is a coming talent.'

'Stanley Matthews knows more about poetry and liter­ature than Mark Onions. Mark Onions couldn't nurse a sick vole.'

'Perhaps I should ask my best man.'

'Your what?*

'Anne and I are to be married. I was hoping your waist­coat would be the one to hold the ring.'

Over the next sixteen years Logan's collection of companies was transformed into a kingdom and then into what the world could only call an empire. The genius, everyone agreed, lay in the grasp of detail, in the flexi­bility of strategy and in the remorseless gathering of comprehensive and grindingly technical intelligence. In the Fifties Michael had picked up a telephone to sell his highly profitable valve-manufacturing plant the moment he had heard from a friend in America about the devel­opment in the labs of an object called the transistor.

'But it will be a long time before they come on to the market/ the friend had warned. 'Vacuum tubes have years in them yet.'

'So I'll get a good price for the factory now. Do you think I will get such a good price next year when every­body knows about this transistor of yours?'

Logan bought into vinyls and man-made fibres in the early Sixties and sold out five years later, just before wool and cotton and leather came triumphantly back into

258

The Hippopotamus

fashion. The teenage daughter of a management employee had told him that nylon was definitely out, square and dud.

The high-street outlets were redesigned, at massive cost, to include aisles and trolleys so that the customers could help themselves to their goods and pay at a cash desk. An unpleasant proceeding, but one which Logan was convinced showed the way forward. The name of these new supermarkets was changed from Logan's to Lomark Stores. All companies, in fact, that Michael acquired traded either under their original names or under new titles which had nothing to do with their owner. The word 'Logan* was used only by the parent corpora­tion in the stock-market listings. 'Nobody likes a smart-arse/ Michael said. If my customers thought that the man who sold them marshmallows and cigarettes was the same man who published their magazines and manu­factured their televisions, they would start to desert me. They have their pride after all/

The financial world knew, naturally, and smiled on what was then a rare treat for the markets, a diverse group of businesses controlled by one holding company; a company that was not afraid to borrow and to expand; to divest here and reinvest there. Every skin Logan shrugged off left pickings on the Stock Exchange floor, every corporate marriage or rape was blessed with prof­itable issue.

Michael's family of second and third cousins proved a sore trial to him, however. Only the ageing Richard

259

Stephen Fry

showed any aptitude for business: he died in 1962, followed soon by his brother Herbert. Their children were uninterested in the empire. Michael wanted very much to help them, as his father had helped them, but they preferred to help themselves, moving to London, marry­ing into established Jewish families and making a quieter way in the world.

'You're not our father/ Danny had said to Michael, refusing an offer of money. 'You mean well, but you will keep trying to swallow everything and everyone up/

Michael was hurt by this. He had a great gift, to make work for thousands, to make money for thousands. It was his duty, surely, to use this gift. Certainly to use it with kindness and consideration. No one treated their workers better. No magnate of comparable power and standing could claim to know the first names and family histories of so many of his employees. No magnate of comparable power welcomed so enthusiastically the arrival of a Labour government. He paid his supertaxes like a man, never grumbling in public, however horri­fied he might have been in private. After the disasters of devaluation and the rising inflation of the 1970s he could never feel again any great respect for party politi­cians or interest in their short-term squabbles. He reserved his political energy for global matters, prefer­ring crafty Third World statesmen with their fly-whisks and djellabas to the dull-witted borough councillors of Westminster. His style of beneficent paternalism was regarded with contempt by the domestic political parties

260

The Hippopotamus

but his even-handedly distributed money was welcomed by all.

Michael's sister, Rebecca, he never expected to be involved in business. He had high hopes that she might be a perfect second wife for his friend Wallace, whose poetry Michael could not begin to understand or enjoy, but whose successful editorship of New Insights had given him real pleasure. She married instead a man called Patrick Burrell, a perfectly ghastly fellow in Michael's estimation who incessantly and gracelessly bothered him for money but at least provided the closest thing Michael ever had to a daughter, his niece Jane.

'Since you always claim that you need money for her sake/ Michael said to Burrell at last, 'I will settle money on her once and for all. A million pounds is hers and hers alone. I will start an account tomorrow. She can have the cheque-book herself when she is twenty-one. If any school fees need to be paid or clothes to be bought for her meanwhile, you will let me know, Patrick, won't you?'

Burrell had taken this badly and some years later sent a telegram to Rebecca from New York informing her that he had found someone else. Michael had been unhappy for his sister, but relieved to be rid of the connection.

A connection he was sorry to sever had come a little more than a year after Rebecca's marriage. It had been drawn to Michael's attention that Edward Wallace had been stealing money from the magazine; not a great deal, it was true, but it was not the scale of the embezzlement

261

Stephen Fry

that had been at issue so far as Michael was concerned. It took him some time to forgive his old friend. He watched in great despair as the poet declined in creativ­ity and charm while increasing in girth and drunken misanthropy.

In 1966, Michael knelt before the Queen and arose a knight. In 1975, he stood to make his maiden speech in the House of Lords as Baron Logan of Swafford. A year later, at the age of forty-six, he came to the decision that he had earned the right to divert his magisterial powers of concentration into the matter of starting a family. He began with a son, Simon. Two years later Anne obliged him with another boy, David. It was after this birth that she persuaded Michael to pardon and absolve Wallace his peculations.

1 can see that you miss him, darling. Let's ask him to be David's godfather.'

Nine years following this, when a woman might reason­ably forgive or even thank her uterus for slipping quietly into desuetude, Anne found herself pregnant again, this time with two boys at once.

IV

In 1991, with the twins approaching their fifth birthday, Edward, the younger by fifteen minutes, showed signs of developing serious problems with his asthma. This inspired Lady Anne to order a regular nightly patrol to monitor his breathing.

262

The Hippopotamus

One hot night, with the air thick with pollen and spore, the twins' nanny Sheila, was heard to shriek in horror. She ran down the nursery passage howling for Lady Anne.

Edward, she wailed, was blue and lifeless in his bed. Dead, not breathing at all. Quite dead. Most awfully dead. Anne and Michael ran for the stairs, their hearts jumping with panic and terror.

Meanwhile the two older boys had been awoken by the same screams and commotion. They hurried straight to the twins' bedroom in equal alarm. Simon took one look at Edward's immobile form and started to pump the lifeless child's arms and legs back and forth, perhaps in some dimly remembered re-enactment of first-aid instructors at school or more probably in imitation of the procedure of vets when dealing with suffocating piglets.

'No!' David had shouted. 'Let me!'

He pushed aside his older brother, who was now pummelling the ribs with some violence. Anne and Michael arrived in time to see Simon being elbowed roughly away.

Then they saw, they all saw, David kneel at the bedside and lay a hand gently on Edward's chest. Immediately, absolutely at once, they are all agreed on this, the child twitched and started to choke and whoop. Michael and Anne were too excited at first, too concerned with call­ing the doctor and seeing Edward to hospital, to poncfer much on what they had witnessed. Michael remembered,

263

Stephen Fry

though, that when he had taken his older sons aside and told them that they must go to bed, David's hand in his felt scorchingly hot, where Simon's was cold.

Some weeks later Michael took David aside.

'Davey, we must talk about your talent.'

'My talent, Daddy?'

'You know what I mean when I use that word. Your healing. I should have spoken before.'

Michael related to David those episodes from the life of Albert Bienenstock that he had previously kept from him: the healing and then the death of Benko, the per­secution that followed and the suspicion and ostracism of the community and its rabbis.

'Your gift, you see, is not something that the world will welcome.'

'But why does Mummy look at me sometimes as if I'm ill or as if I've done something wrong?'

'She's confused, Davey. You must try to understand.'

David nodded. Michael went next to speak to his wife.

'Tell me truly, what are your feelings about Davey's gift?' he asked.

'Gift?' Anne looked at him in surprise.

'The gift he used to bring Edward back to life.'

Anne turned away, but Michael took her by the shoul­ders and brought her round to face him.

'You know what we saw, Anne.'

'I know . . .' she said.

'It confuses you and worries you.'

Anne nodded.

264

The Hippopotamus

'We must make sure/ Michael said, 'that Davey's life will not be disrupted. We cannot allow the thing to be known/

Anne considered this in silence.

'You're thinking of your father, aren't you?' she said.

Tm thinking of Davey. Just of Davey. He is not to be treated as a freak.'

'But darling, you can't really . . .'

'We'll say no more.'

'I agree/ said Anne. 'We should say no more.'

More had to be said, however, the following year. Michael's niece Jane arrived in the midsummer of 1991 for her last stay at Swafford. She had spent many months fighting the exhausting cruelty of her disease and was not expected to survive for many weeks longer. All she wanted now, she said, was the peace of the countryside and the love of her uncle and cousins; these she would take away as a memory to comfort her last few sterile days in hospital.

Her collapse at the Royal Norfolk Show was held to be the onset of a terminal and irreversible decline. Simon had been forced to drive her back to Swafford himself despite being too young for a licence and surer of trac­tors than of Jane's twitchy BMW. He had carried her white and feeble form easily up the stairs, 'light as a plucked partridge, really,' and laid her on the bed of the Landseer Room. The room, the doctors agreed, in which she would shortly die.

During the first week of her confinement David and

265

Stephen Fry

Simon were able to visit her. Simon would look in each morning with fruit, flowers and stories of life on the estate, and in the afternoons David would come with a book and sit by the bed, reading and chatting until dinnertime, never minding if Jane drifted in and out of sleep while he talked.

On the boys' last morning at Swafford they went in together to the sick room, solemn and elegant in their school uniforms, to bid her farewell.

'You look like dreadful pale undertakers/ she said. 'You shouldn't. I feel so much better today.'

The boys departed feeling greatly hopeful. A week later Jane was out of bed, professing herself not just better but truly cured. Cured not only in body, but cured all through. She felt more well now than she ever did before the leukaemia had come. She claimed that her previous life had been that of a caterpillar and that now she was reborn as a free and perfect butterfly.

Anne asked her, very seriously and in private, if she believed that there was any tangible cause or agency involved in this cure. Jane prevaricated, hiding behind a wide and tangled linguistic bush. Her words were of angels and grace and purity and becoming. Anne went away puzzled and alarmed.

Michael's visit was more straightforward.

'My love, we are so happy. So happy that you are better. However this may have happened, it is best, do you not think, to celebrate it in peace as a quiet and wonderful thing that took place in the privacy of what

266

The Hippopotamus

I hope you will always think of as your family home?'

'Whatever you say Uncle Michael/

Logan's friend Max Clifford was staying at this time and Michael wanted to speak to him on the subject too.

It's just this, Max. You know what devils journalists can be.'

'We've sacked plenty in our time between us, eh?'

'Jane is going to London for tests. It may be that she is right and, as does sometimes happen with leukaemia, she has truly managed to overcome the illness. We don't want, we really don't want any publicity attached to this. Newspapers are so hysterical when it comes to anything connected to cancer and there are always reli­gious or mystical freaks who have something to sell. Jane herself is not quite in her right mind about things yet . . .'

'There have been rumours, Michael. Mary tells me she heard her praying in the woods yesterday.'

'Max,' said Michael, 'this is precisely what I mean. While she is so disturbed it is essential that everything is played down.'

'Mm,' said Max. 'She was kneeling there on the ground. A lot of Druidical guff apparently and a great deal about David.'

'If you are my friend, Max,' Michael was very sharp now, 'you will say no more on this subject. Not to me, not to anyone.'

267

Stephen Fry

The following year however, it was made clear that, despite Logan's injunctions, word had spread. Firstly, Ted Wallace arrived with a quaint story about wanting to write Michael's official biography, a claim that Michael frankly found absurd and a typical, Tedwardly piece of transparent deviousness. Anne had the idea in her head that Wallace might prove a 'steadying influence' on David, but it was clear to Michael that he was there, as usual, to upset apple carts and set pumas among pigeons. The Logans found it difficult to talk to each other about David. Michael wondered if his wife might be in some submerged way envious of the genes David had inher­ited from Albert Bienenstock. Perhaps she found Ted's worldly cynicism a welcome relief. Perhaps she even welcomed the idea of Ted corrupting David with alco­hol or initiating him into Norwich's few sad specimens of harlotry, anything to upset the delicate balance of the qualities in her son that she found so disquieting. Michael considered all these possibilities carefully. To appease her and because it was better to have a man like Ted inside his tent pissing out, than outside pissing in, Michael concealed his misgivings and made a show of being pleased to see the old drunkard at Swafford. He never went so far as to trust him; that would be insanity. Instead, he required Podmore to maintain a discreet watch and found out from this that Ted appeared to be in constant postal communication with Jane. Podmore had been quite happy to take it upon himself to do some dusting around the computer currently installed in the

268

The Hippopotamus

Landseer Room and as a result of this zealous house­work Michael had discovered, much to his surprise, that the contents of Ted's letters revealed an apparent igno­rance of what had been going on as far as Davey was concerned.

Meanwhile, Oliver Mills had invited himself for a few weeks, then Max and Mary Clifford had asked if they might come with their daughter Clara, a girl they never usually took anywhere if they could help it, embarrassed as they were by her unfortunate appearance. Jane's close friend Patricia Hardy was the next to arrive. When Rebecca rang her brother to see if she might too 'pop down for a week or so', Michael began to grow seriously worried. He felt the thing was growing too fast. He knew, in business terms, how hard it was to keep things secret. You cannot cap a volcano. True, the house-party now convened at Swafford constituted none but close, if not trusted, friends, but for how long could such a state of affairs be maintained?

Encouraged by his discovery of Ted's ignorance and innocence in the matter therefore and suddenly acutely aware that a best friend is a best friend, however many times he might lie to you and steal from you, Michael decided to accede to the original request and tell his life story to that old fraud Edward Lennox Wallace. It was, perhaps, the best and clearest way to get Ted up to speed and on-side.

On the second day of their talk, which Michael found he was enjoying immensely, Ted revealing himself to be

269

Stephen Fry

a surprisingly appreciative listener, the news about Lilac broke and the urgency and importance of their collabo­ration impressed itself all the more clearly on Michael's mind. There was no evidence that David was behind the recovery in Lilac that had the vet scratching his head in astonishment, but there could be absolutely no doubt whatsoever, so far as Michael was concerned, as to the provenance of this miracle, nor, it would seem, was anyone else in the house uncertain. The business of Lilac, coming when it did, destroyed whatever illusion Michael may have had that he was controlling the situation. He broke with all restraint and told Ted everything, not even omit­ting his differences with Lady Anne in the matter or the details of his sordid involvement in the reading of Ted's letter to Jane. Since the day he had read Uncle Amos's letter from Jerusalem telling him of his father's death, Michael had never placed himself at another's mercy. He did so now.

There you have it, Tedward. The unvarnished truth. So what do I do? Is Davey's gift meant for the world? Do I roar it from the battlements? Or is it a curse that should be hidden away in shame? Do we call for a priest? A doctor? A shrink? You are the boy's godfather. Advise.'

'Hum,' said Wallace. 'Hah.'

'Well?'

'I shall need some time. I have ideas. For the moment I'd recommend you sit tight and do nothing.'

'Do nothing/

'Often the wisest course. In my case, I must think.'

270

The Hippopotamus

Think? Think? What's to think?'

'Well, to be truthful, Michael, a man doesn't like to learn at the age of sixty-six that everything he's always believed in makes no sense.'

And what have you ever believed in, Edward Wallace?'

'Oh, you know, little things. Little things, like how hard it is to write a poem.'

271

7

12a Onslow Terr. 28th July 1992

Dear Ted,

I think you must be there now. Patricia tells me that you and Uncle Michael have been 'closeted together' for some time.

It's time for me to come down. You can give me the fruits of your conversations with Uncle Michael when I arrive tomorrow, after my final tests. Can you understand now why I have been so excited? I'm so pleased that you have been sharing in this with me.

You can talk to Patricia and Mummy now and let them know what you've been up to. But not a word to anyone outside Swafford, of course.

Look after Davey though. Make sure he keeps up his strength and isn't made to feel isolated or used.

When Davey first told me how he had healed Edward I knew that my decision to come to Swafford had been meant. Was 'miracle' really too strong a word? I don't think so. Surely you can't now either.

272

The Hippopotamus

Tell me this isn't going to change your life, Ted, and I'll call you a liar.

Much, much love

Jane

PS: My most urgent and final 'proclamation' as you like to call them is this: Smile! We are loved. We are loved. Everything is going to be wonderful. Everything shines. Everything is as it could only be and must be.

II

From the diary of Oliver Mills: 29th July 1992, Swafford Hall

Everything has come to a head, dearest Daisy Diary. I write this in tumbling confusion. It's eleven at night and in three hours' time I shall . . . well I don't know what I shall, but it will be the terror of the earth and that's a fact.

I mentioned yesterday that the Hearty Hetties of the household were getting all dismal about some horse, a hunter owned and ridden, as they say on race cards, by Michael himself. The name of the beast, Lilac, besides being camper than a jamboree of Danish scouts in Spandex briefs, betrays the

273

Stephen Fry

Jenny Gender. Lilac is a big brown mare and the Cox's Orange Pippin of Logan's eye. Yesterday as I made most meticulous mention, she began to display symptoms of something madly amiss. Vera Vet pronounced that it had all the hallmarks of Ragwort Poisoning. The common ragwort, dread thing, possesses some alkaloid which degenerates the liver: no Auntie Dote is known to man. Horses don't usually eat Rachel Ragwort as she's bitterer than a forgotten poet, but Lilac was grazing in the park at the front of the house last week and might have nibbled away without noticing. Yesterday she was seen to be bleeding from the mouth like Chopin, circling round and round and leaning her head against the wall looking dismal: this means a Dysfunction of the Liver, sure as eggs are oval. Terminal. Incurable. Why horses possess livers I can't for a moment imagine. I've yet to see one with a voddie and tonic. However, I mustn't rattle on, there's lots to write and do before beddies: oh my, is there ever lots to write and do. Dysfunctions of the liver, according to Vera Vet - real name Nigel Ogden, and rather a choice arrangement, as it happens, amber corduroys sheathing the second most provoking bottie in Norfolk - are a guaran­teed one-way ticket to Horsy Heaven. Nige would leave Simon and Michael with a day to think what they wanted to do with Lilac and return on the morrow (i.e. today) with a humane killer, should

274

The Hippopotamus

disposal - which Vera Vet frankly recommended, so excitingly harsh, so maddeningly cruel, so thrillingly unsentimental these country people - be the preferred Oprah Option.

Dinner last night, Daisy, was thus wise rather a forlorn affair. Simon, naturally, was all for a bash on the head and a quick sale to the glue factory. Probably would have bought a jar of reconstituted Lilac and used it to mend his wellies too, heartless beast.

I was thinking 'Go on, Davey boy! Lay on with your hands. Don't just sit there . . .' and so I bet were Patricia and Rebecca. Annie was looking daggers at all of us and at Davey especially, so he stayed quiet. If there is such a thing as telepathy then my silent screaming entreaties should have deafened his cute little inner ear. There was a sparkle in that velvet eye and a flush to those nectarine cheeks that bespoke something, I'm sure of that. There could not be a more clearly heaven­sent and angel-scented opportunity to test his powers than the War of Lilac's Liver and he must know it.

Michael was very quiet, as he has been most of the week. He looks worn out, poor lug. He spent the afternoon and early evening closeted with Ted Wallace which, let's face it, would shag out a Jack Russell. I give up with Ted. When I think back to the merry piglet I knew in the Sixties and early

275

Stephen Fry

Seventies and then look at the mud-encrusted lump that confronts us today I want to weep. He won't let anyone in. The cheap pose of the cantankerous old griffin is bad enough in the talentless journal­ists and layabouts he associates with; but in Ted, who once had a real helping of that thing called talent, it's heartbreaking. You try and talk to him, try just to bring him out of his private hell and he can't bear it, as if emotional frankness were a distasteful social boo-boo, like saying 'pardon' or fitting a candlewick cover to your loo-lid. All 1 want to do is see him break down. Whoops, sounds cruel. I mean by it that I just want to hear him say, once, 'I know, Oliver. It's awful. I've lost it and I hate it and you must forgive me if I get all choleric and sour. Inside, I'm still the Happy Hippo with a heart. Help me.' Would that be too much? It would trans­form him, I'm sure it would. But you can't get in. The bolts are drawn.

Aside from anything else his attitude is far from simpatico on the Davey front. I cannot understand why Annie encourages his attentions in that quar­ter. If anything is guaranteed to break the spell it will be Ted's crapulent can't-impress-me scepticism.

All in all, with Ted wearing his worst 'what boring children you are' face, Michael glowering at one end of the table, Annie nervous as a grass-hopper at the other, and the rest of us in varying states of elec­tric tension in between, a pretty glum dinz all round.

276

The Hippopotamus

I shot off to bed early Cheryl Chest was beating her terrible tattoo and I needed my pills and the soft snog of Sandra Sleep.

A strange waking this morning. I thought at first that Vesta Vision was playing the giddy goat with me. This is it/ I moan to myself. 'Next, the tingle down the arms, then the tightness in the throat, finally the big cardiac club that fells me once and for all/

I stared at the vision helplessly. It was that of a fiendish child, or rather two fiendish children, for it was doubled, like the split-field effects they used to employ to indicate drunkenness in zany Tony Randall comedies. You were supposed, in that tradi­tion, either to clutch your head and groan 'Uh-oh, too many Martinis,' or to gurgle, hiccup and ask the barman for another and another, all on account of how Doris Day doesn't understand you.

I was not drunk, however, and was certain, as I always have been, that Doris Day understands me perfectly. Nothing symptomatic of coronary unpleas­antness, just the double demons.

I closed my eyes tight and opened them again. Still the same identical child-beasts. The one on the left spoke.

'He's awake.'

The image on the right giggled and I realised that Mother had been reacting like a hysterical old ninny. It was all simply explained.

277

Stephen Fry

'You're the twins/ I manage to croak.

'Yes we certainly are/ says the one on the left.

'Which is which?'

'He's Edward and he's James/ they chirrup simul­taneously which is no help.

'Can't you wear badges with letters on them so we know?' I suggest.

'Ha, ha! We like people not knowing.'

I look at them for a while.

'You're James,' I decide, pointing at the one on the left.

'How do you know?' he says, disappointed.

'Ha, ha! I just knew'

'No, go on, tell.'

'Well,' I say, 'your breathing isn't as dramatic as Edward's and I happen to know that Edward has asthma.'

They glare at each other with recrimination. James starts to try and imitate Edward's gulping breaths. I know I will always be able to tell them apart though, because now that I look, Edward's chest is notably larger than James's and his shoulders set more upright.

'You had quite a bad turn last year, didn't you?' I ask.

Edward responds with great pride. 'Simon thought I was a sodding goner. Looked very bad he said. Blue as a still-born runt.'

'But somehow you pulled through?'

278

The Hippopotamus

James and Edward exchange glances. 'Mummy says we're not supposed to talk about it/

'Never mind/ I say. 'I'm Oliver, by the way.'

'We know that. How do you do?'

'How do you do?' I reply with matching cere­mony.

'Do you want to hear a good joke?' asks James.

'Always want to hear a good joke/

He clears his throat grandly as if about to recite 'Gunga Din'.

'Knock knock/

'Who's there?'

'I done up.'

I pray this isn't going to be one of those tiresome nonjokes that children inflict upon us without understanding them themselves.

'I done up who?'

'Eurgh!!' They scream with delight. 'You done a poo! You done a poo!'

So pleasing to have someone on my level at Swafford at last.

'Well, you must leave me now while I dress. Any idea of the time?'

With the practised ease of synchronised swim­mers they each inspect a watch.

Twenty-five past nine/ they chorus.

'Anyone still at breakfast?'

'Everyone else is round the stables. We're not allowed because the horses make Edward wheeze.'

279

Stephen Fry

The stables?'

'Mr Tubby came round to say that Lilac's ever so better.'

Yippy-didol I fling on my clothes and streak round to the stable yard. Vera Vet is stepping into his Volvo. Lovat green cords this time, not quite such a good colour for him, it seems to me. Simon, Davey, Michael, Anne, Patricia, Rebecca, Ted and the Cliffords are all there.

'Let me know if there's any change. It's really most . . .' He shakes his brown curls. Tve seen recovery before, but never so fast.'

We watch his car disappear. Michael turns towards Lilac's kennel or whatever they're called, where Simon stands stroking Lilac herself: she certainly looks in my ignorant estimation as bright of eye and glossy of coat as one could wish. David lurks modestly in the background, tracing patterns in the dust with the point of his shoe. The Cliffords, Rebecca and Patricia are staring at him.

'So what are we all hanging around here for, then?' Michael wants to know. He claps his hands. 'She's a mare, not the Mona bloody Lisa. Let's go inside. Ted, we'll get on, shall we?'

Michael and Ted return to the house. Simon pats Lilac and goes off to talk to Tubby the groom. I take my courage in both hands and snaffle David, much to the boiling rage of the others.

'Well/ I say brightly, 'there's a mercy. I don't have

280

The Hippopotamus

a thing in black. If there'd been a funeral I should have looked horribly festive/

Annie trolls over. Any plans today Oliver?'

'Well . . .' say I.

'Like to come on the lake again?' Davey suggests, eyes round and lovely.

Annie checks this move.

'Looks like rain/ she says, scanning the cloudless sky. 'There's talk of it anyway. Today or tomorrow. Why not go into town? See a film or something?'

I get the sitch. She wants her boy-child safe in a city not standing on the lawn laying hands on her guests like Bernadette at a fete.

'Good idea/ I say.

Whatever happens I plan to ask Davey about the horse. Did he press a hand to her flank, pop a crys­tal in her ear . . . what?

'All right then.' Davey doesn't look too excited, but he's game. It may be my turn. Nothing wrong with Rebecca so far as I can tell, Patricia's in a bate because that Rebak piece jilted her and Clara just needs a squint corrected and her teeth pushed in. I could do that myself with enough follow-through. No question in my mind or, I hope, Davey's: Mother's angina comes first.

Bitch it . . . I'm out of voddie now. I shall steal down for a bottle . . .

... Betterness. Much of betterness. No one saw me, full flask of Stolly by my side, now I can concentrate.

281

Stephen Fry

Where had I got to? Davey and Mother's Day Out. Much to tell.

We walked round the corner to where my Saab was quartered.

'What's on?' I asked.

'On?'

At the cinema, bum-brain.'

'Oh . . .' He kicked a stone. 'Who cares?'

I started in on the questioning as soon as the car had cleared the driveway. 'Now, Davey. Darling. I want to know everything.'

He looked across at me with a smile. An over­whelming urge to run my tongue around and into his lips threatened to unseat my reason. Dreadful. Simply dreadful. I'm an Esau girl, these days. Give me an hairy man, not an smooth, that's my glad cry. Davey has a power though, oh Jessie, does he ever have a power. Mother knew that she was going to have to be very, very careful.

'Look,' I said. 'Time for Trudie Truth and her cheerleader chums Connie Candour and Fanny Frankness. I know and you know about Jane. I know and you know about Edward and his asthma. And now we have Lilac and her magic liver.'

David breathed out deeply and drummed his heels in the footwell.

'I have to find out, Davey. Fm sick myself, as you know. I must find out what's been going on.'

There was a pause while he wrestled with his

282

The Hippopotamus

... I don't know, conscience or pride I suppose. 'I have very hot hands/ he said at last. 'Feel/

He offered me his hand. It was a warm day so I wouldn't have expected a cold feel from a fish, but Davey's hand ... cub's honour, Daisy ... it scorched. Not a wet heat, nothing sweaty, but Lord, hotter by far than 98.4°F, I would swear to that.

'Bloody hell, darling! That's, that's . . .'

'I've always had very hot hands, you see. When I saw Edward lying there I knew that my hand on his chest would help.'

'So that's it, is it? That's all you have to do?'

Davey shook his head. 'No. You see I tried that with Jane when she was here last month and noth­ing happened.'

'Nothing?'

'Not a thing. The leukaemia is deep in the bones you see, the platelets of the blood are manufactured in the marrow. I knew I would have to . . . have to get right inside her.'

Oh my God, thinks Mother. He fisted her. The little darling fisted her.

'When you say . . . get right inside her?'

Davey hovered on the brink. He's never told anyone, I think to myself. He's on the verge of pour­ing it all out. All the secrets of his sorcery.

'You see . . . there's . . .'

He dries up.

I take the next turning in the road, down a little

283

Stephen Fry

lane and towards a wood. Fuck the cinema, we can find out what was on and pretend we saw it.

The sound of the ratchets of the handbrake bring him out of his trance.

'Where are we?' he whispers.

* Let's go for a ramble and you can tell me every­thing.'

A sign on the fence surrounding the wood says 'Private', but I figure we're unlikely to run into anyone. David springs over like an antelope as I straddle the wire clumsily, snagging a perfectly good pair of Ralph Lauren chinos.

The copse is no more than three or four acres. Beech, ash, oak, brutes like that. Very quiet in that muffled way that woods have.

'You were saying, Davey,' I say as we penetrate the gloom, 'that Jane's leukaemia wasn't sensitive to touch alone?'

Tve always known you see . . . and you swear you'll keep all this to yourself?'

'Swear, swear and double-swear. Cross my heart and hope to go bald.'

'I've always known,' he says, 'that the gift - I call it the gift not my gift - I've always known that the gift comes from here.'

He stopped, knelt and pressed a palm against the earth.

I nodded. David looked like staying on the ground so I got down and sat beside him.

284

The Hippopotamus

'It's the power of Everything. The word is “chan­nelled”. The power of Everything can be channelled through me. But I have to be strong, you see. I have to be . . . pure/

'You see' was becoming his trademark phrase. He wants me to see. He desperately wants me to see.

'Pure, Davey? What do you mean by pure?'

'I'm very healthy myself, you see. I'm never ill and I never get spots or infections or anything like that. This is because I only eat pure food. Not the meat of animals or plant matter that has been artif-ically forced. My family used to think I was a crank when I was younger. Most children go through a phase of vegetarianism, but they aren't as commit­ted as I have always been. Now I think they under­stand. They never talk about it though.'

'So you believe that this diet in some way makes your body purer for this channelling?'

'That's only part of it. You see, there are other kinds of purity. My spirit must be pure. It cannot afford to be contaminated by anything impure.'

'So you think there are spiritual equivalents to meat and non-organic vegetables?'

'You could put it that way, I suppose.' Davey lay back and looked at the roof of the wood.

'A pure mind in a pure body, then?'

'Yes. But you see I am human, aren't I? I mean, I am a human being.'

285

Stephen Fry

I was glad he was sure of that. I couldn't have coped if he'd claimed to be an angel.

'And as a human being/ he went on, 'I feel hunger and cold and pain like everyone else. All kinds of hunger.'

Ah. I dimly saw what he was trying to say. He needed assistance, here, I felt. Mother came to the rescue with polished ease.

'You mean that you worry about your other hungers? Fleshly hungers, shall we call them?'

'Mm hm.' He nodded. 'When I first had a wet dream ... it was only a year ago, which is late, but so what?'

He threw out this embarrassing fact like a chal­lenge, giving me the impression that he had been teased at school for lagging behind in development.

'So what indeed? I didn't mature in that way till I was sixteen,' I lied helpfully.

Davey was not interested in Mother's genital development. 'I caught up anyway,' he mumbled. Mother was aware of this. Mother knows how to inspect a trouser bulge, I hope.

'Anyway,' said Davey, 'I had one of those dreams. When I woke up I didn't know what to do. I knew that I couldn't allow such a terrible waste.'

'Er . . .'

'It's not just my hands, you see. I knew that every part of me could heal. My blood and my . . . my . . .' He broke off, unable to find a word.

286

The Hippopotamus

'Seed?' I suggested.

'Mm. My seed. So I couldn't afford to waste any of it with cheap . . . you know.'

Wow!

'So, are we perhaps saying, Davey/ I said care­fully, as if I were Socrates exploring a premise with Alcibiades, 'that the “way in” to someone's body you talked about earlier might in fact be through your seed?'

'Of course/ said David. 'But just so long as I am pure and only use its grace to heal. I must never use it to give pleasure to myself/

'So . . .' again the utmost delicacy seemed to be required, '. . . so in Jane's case the only way to help her was . . .'

David sat up and looked straight into my eyes. Hypnotic little baggage.

'We talked about it very fully/ he said. 'Jane under­stood what I was suggesting. She decided that even if the gift were not to work, at least it would be something . . .'

'At least it would be a kind and helpful expe­rience for you and a comfort and pleasure for her?'

'Exactly!' Davey smiled. 'I wasn't very ... anyway it doesn't matter, the whole point was to heal Jane, not to “make love” in that sense.'

'And so your seed entered her body'

'That was on my last night before I had to go

287

Stephen Fry

back to school. We'd arranged I should visit her bedroom late.'

So intrigued had I been, Daisy, by the prospect of these two cousins at it like knives in the stilly watches that the other, obvious, thought hadn't entered my head.

Lilac . . .

I'd have to tread carefully here.

And we know,' I said, 'how wonderfully that particular . . . er, treatment . . . worked in Jane's case. So when it came to helping Lilac, you no doubt . . . ?'

The same thing, that's right.'

All inhibition gone now. Said as matter-of-factly as you could wish. Amanda Amazement and Diana Disgust were denied any access to my features as I reacted to this. It was necessary to react as though he were telling me about nothing more remarkable than a trip to the sea-side.

'So that would have been last night,' I said.

'Yes. Last night.'

A wistful grin now, true love recalled.

'I know some people would find it disgusting,' he went on. A human and a horse, I mean. But they don't understand the connection between life and nature and grace. It was truly the most natural thing in the world.'

I hastened to agree with him and he lay back again, content to have his secret shared.

288

The Hippopotamus

Where did all this leave Mother, you'll be wonder­ing, Daisy mine. Well, Mother was heating up like a milk pan in a kiln. If this fifteen-year-old faun with the curling lashes and take-me-now lips was the future of medicine in Great Britain, then a lot of people were going to be queuing up for a cure if ever word got out.

And Michael and Anne. Your parents. They don't know about this . . .' I searched for a neutral phrase, 'this aspect of your healing?'

He shook his head.

'It would worry them. Daddy's quite proud of me, I think. He values the gift. But Mummy's fright­ened, I can tell.'

She'd be frightened a whole size bigger if she knew, thought I.

There he lay and there I sat. All that power swim­ming in his fuzzy little ball-sack: all that fatty deposit lining my aorta and waiting to be cleansed away.

I've always tried to be honest with you, dear Daisy. I told you about the fetching episode in the Finsbury Park nightclub. I was manly and frank on the subject of the bondage queen who tried to bite off my nipples in his flat in Hyde Park Gate. I confessed openly that I allowed that gorilla of a policeman in New York to slap my legs with a towel and call me his bitch-pig slave. I can be honest here too, and admit that even if I had not been diagnosed as suffering genuinely from angina pectoris I should

289

Stephen Fry

have laid claim to it there and then without a moment's thought.

God, it has to be faced, can be astonishingly sweet. When I was a priest, and I'd be the first to admit that I only joined up because I liked the bells-and-smells aspect, the cotters, the thuribles and the sung versicles, I thought God was a capricious prig. Here was I, burning and yearning to serve, and there was the horrid, horrid Bible, never a book that I thought much of, telling me how damned and abominable I was. Couldn't have been pleaseder to hand in my notice and flounce from the chancel never to return.

But - and you know this, Daisy, better than anyone, you who know my inmost heart - there was what we can only call a Void in Mother's life. I've tried my bloody best, I've fought with my tiny fists for the oppressed and the hurt in the world, I've put my talent into things that matter and I've made an effort - unlike Wallace - to live a decent life. I know lots of nasties wouldn't think being pissed on in New York or rimmed behind a bush on Hampstead Heath is decent, but you and I know, Daisy, what decent means.

Now, here was Glenda God giving me the chance to be physically whole in a way that exactly suited the very passion that Big Brenda Bible had always claimed to be unclean. God makes things fit, you have to hand it to Her.

I said to David.

290

The Hippopotamus

Tm unwell. Do you think ... do you think you could help meT

I prayed a little prayer that angina wasn't the kind of affliction that a laying-on of hands could cure.

Davey smiled. 'Of course I can help you, Oliver. It's what Tm here to do.'

A great smarting wave of blood rushed up the nape of my neck. When I spoke, my voice was husky.

'Here? Now?'

David shook his head. 'I don't think so. I'll visit you tonight. That would be better.'

Tm in the Fuseli Room, slap next to Ted Wallace. I can hear his snoring clearly enough so . . .'

'All right then, you come to my room. You know where it is?'

I nodded, not liking the way such practicalities lent the tryst a squalid air.

We got back in the car, tea-ed at the Scole Inn and returned to Swafford singing the praises of Unforgiven, which I'd seen and in whose details I gave David a good briefing.

Well, Daisy. Here we are. It's a quarter to two. Thank God I never travel without my breath-spray or a spare tube of Man Glide. I'm off to Davey's Den. Wish me luck, my darling.

291

Stephen Fry

III

Astonishingly, Mother Mills came down to breakfast after me on Thursday morning. A man takes pride in always being the last one down and I didn't enjoy being beaten.

'Morning, Ted/ Oliver trilled as he came into the dining room.

'You're revoltingly cheerful/ I said, propping the Telegraph against the marmalade jar.

Am I? Am I? Yes, I suppose I am/ he replied with a giggle, practically skipping to the sideboard. 'I could eat a horse. Which, let's face it darling, we all may well have been forced to do had little Lilac not made such an amaz­ing recovery yesterday'

Hell and turds, I thought. Here we go. 'With the best will in the world, Oliver,' I said with a firm rasp, 'can we please find something to talk about this morning other than bloody miracles?'

'You still can't bear it, can you, baby? The proof that there truly are more things in heaven and earth than your puny, fusty, narrow philosophy ever dreamed of

'I wonder if a man in your condition should be stuff­ing himself with quite so much fried food,' I said, eyeing with revulsion the heaped kidney and sausage that he plonked down on the table next to me.

'Ho-ho!' he said, returning to the sideboard. A man in my condition?' He began to fill another plate, flourish­ing the serving-spoon like a cocktail waitress. 'I'm sure I

292

The Hippopotamus

don't know what you mean by “a man in my condition”. What condition?'

I stared up at him, quite unable to hide my dismay. 'Oh, no . . .'

He beamed with what he no doubt considered an inner radiance and I considered a vile smirk.

'Oh yes. Oh yessy-yes-yes.'

'Don't tell me you've had the bloody laying-on-of-hands treatment as well?'

'I'm whole, Ted. As cured as this bacon and twice as hot and sizzling.'

'Well,' I gave him a sour look as he sat down beside me with a wince, 'the little Miracle Worker doesn't seem to have had the kindness to heal all your infirmities, does he?'

'Meaning?'

'You've got the piles that afflict us all, I note.'

'Oh those,' he said, with a smile, 'they'll pass in time no doubt.'

'Humph. I'd be more inclined to trust good old Preparation H myself

He waded in on his gargantuan breakfast. Despite my irritation I found myself impressed by the confidence of his demeanour and the unquestionably genuine sparkle in his eye.

'Be serious, Oliver,' I said. 'Do you honestly believe that you have been cured? Completely cured?'

'I've thrown away my pills, Ted. I feel . . . oh, it's impossible to put into words how I feel. Davey is a gift from God. A gift from Glenda herself

293

Stephen Fry

'And his touch ... did you feel this warmth that every­one talks about?1

'Darling/ said Oliver, a forkful of kidney hovering in front of his mouth, 'it is simply the hottest thing I have ever felt in my life. It burns like a soldering iron. My word, how it burns. Right inside the deepest deeps it burns/

I knew now that I had to do that thing that I hate most to do. I had to think. I had to sit, close my eyes, press my hands to my ears and analyse, like a chess­player or a code-breaker. The most dreaded activity a man can undertake. I hadn't done it since last I wrote a decent poem.

I decided that the Villa Rotunda would make the ideal cogitarium, but that it would be madness to go there without fortification. I left Oliver to swim in the riotous grease of his breakfast and his self-satisfaction and made my way to the library.

Morning drinking times are matters of great debate. The threshold moves inexorably the more alcohol becomes a habit. I can remember a time when I thought it was impossible to take a glug of anything stronger than tomato juice before twelve o'clock. Twelve o'clock became half past eleven, became eleven, became half ten, became ten and so on. This was before the great puritan back­lash of course which has made drinking a private vice never to be shown the light at lunch-times. Alcohol is the great secret of our age. If the public knew, if they had the remotest idea of the amount of drinking done by our

294

The Hippopotamus

politicians and leaders, they would be shocked to their boxers. Fortunately, journalists, as is better known, are inebriates too, so they have an interest in keeping a lid on things. The number of Members of Parliament who aren't what doctors would call a functional alcoholic is astound-ingly small. Alan Beith is a teetotaller, I seem to remem­ber, and Tony Benn gets by on tea and pipe-tobacco; they are the only dry parliamentarians I can think of for the moment. Any others are doubtless abstemious because they have been told by their doctors that one more smell of brandy would kill them. I've seen Chancellors and Prime Ministers pissed as rats, judges too and news-readers and chairmen of transnational giants. A well-known television political commentator told me at the Harpo once that the war in Bosnia, from which he had just returned, was run exclusively on alcohol. Skirmishes and strategies are entirely ordered according to supplies of slivovitz and vodka.

Alcohol is the prime determining factor of human history: the dethronement of British Prime Ministers, civil strife in Russia and the ruin of whole financial struc­tures can be traced back to the glass. We are led to believe that it is only football hooligans who can't handle it; the fact is that it's too big an issue even to think of confronting. Thank God. For, having said all that, we get by on it far better than we manage without. Total abstain­ers make rotten leaders of men and incompetent husbands, lovers and fathers. Drunkards hiccup, belch, fart, vomit and stain the front of their trousers with piss.

295

Stephen Fry

Puritans never reveal any of their functions, and it's a short step from denying the world access to your own base physicality to denying others the right to any base physicality of their own.

Special pleading on my part, no doubt. Perhaps we hear once more the light footfall of Pudoria, Goddess of Guilt. I think, as much as anything, that I had become annoyed with myself for taking such a noticeable drop in drinking since I had arrived at Swafford. Not annoyed with myself, more infuriated by the kindly approval of everyone else.

Ted, you look so welll'

This seems to have been something of a rest cure for you, Ted.'

'Wendy Whisky is becoming offended by your inat­tentions, dear/

That kind of junk. It took a considerable effort to remember to have an ostentatious drink from time to time, merely in order to stop them from strewing rose-petals in my path and chalking up another cure to Davey.

I headed for the library therefore to see if I couldn't push a couple down my throat before giving myself over to thought.

I believed I had the place to myself, but a snivel from a deep wing-chair in the corner told me that I had female company.

'You all right, Patricia?' I said, coming up behind her. Should have coughed my approach, I suppose, for I gave her one hell of a turn.

296

The Hippopotamus

'Please, Ted! You shouldn't sneak up like that.' She had been crying steadily for some time. 'Very sorry/ I said. 'Everything all right?' 'Well, what does it look like, you fat idiot?' 'Contrary to popular belief/ I said, 'it only makes it worse to take it out on someone else. I don't think you'll find insulting me very helpful.'

'Is that your attempt at sympathy?' 'It's practicality, which is kinder than sympathy.' She wiped her nose. 'Well I certainly don't need a cross between G. K. Chesterton and a fucking calendar motto.'

'You still thinking of that Martin Rebak?' He was the underling of Michael's who had ditched Patricia.

She nodded. 'Got a letter from him this morning. I thought perhaps he might have tired of his new infatu­ation. He's just married her.'

'Then clearly he has tired of her,' I said. 'Oh, give it a rest, Ted.'

'Well, what do you want me to say? That he is not worth your tears? That you'll get over it? That it's always darkest just before the dawn and that time heals all wounds?'

T need David, that's what I need.' 'And what do you think he can give you?' 'Hope,' she said. 'A sense of worth.' There you have the modern Briton. It drives me to a frothing frenzy when politicians return from inner cities saying, 'What the people of this town need is Hope,' as

297

Stephen Fry

if we could all respond with a glad cry of 'No sooner said than done, old sport/ as we gather up a handful of Hope from the sideboard, stuff it into a Jiffy-bag and send it off to Liverpool 8 by the First Class post. What these bleeding hearts mean is Money, but they're too greasy to say so. Hope may spring eternal in the human breast, but you can't suck it off another's tits, it has to lactate in your own. Not the kind of message to give a girl in Patricia's state, I supposed. As for a sense of worth . . .

The best way to mend your spirits,' I offered instead, 'is to do something for someone else.'

'Meaning?' she asked coldly.

'Meaning, why not do me a favour?'

'Such as?'

'Such as, when this strange little holiday is over and we're back in London, why not oblige me by allowing yourself to be taken out to dinner? Le Caprice is an olivestone's throw from my flat. We could eat a good dinner and then you could let me lie you on a litter and lick you like a lolly'

She stared at me. 'I'm young enough to be your daugh­ter.'

'I'm not fussy'

'This is your idea of grief therapy is it, Ted? Coming on like a randy goat?'

'I'll leave you to think it over. My evenings get pretty booked up, so you'll have to be quick.'

'You're serious, aren't you?' she said, stopping me with a hand, which I took in mine.

298

The Hippopotamus

Tm a fat old man, Patricia. It's hard enough to find women of my own age who aren't prostitutes, but a young thing like you . . . well it would be a rare treat. Possibly my last ever. Thighs unpitted by cellulite, breasts that stand up like begging dogs. How often do you think I am granted such pleasures these days?'

'And what makes you think I would consent to being slobbered over by you?' she asked, withdrawing her hand.

Tour innate kindness,' I said, going over to pour myself a large glass of sherry. The knowledge that you would be making me quite cretinously happy'

It's a hell of a thing to ask.'

'Ha ha!' I said triumphantly. 'And just why is it such a hell of a thing to ask?'

'What do you mean?'

'You said that it was a hell of a thing to ask. Why should you think that?'

'Well, for your information, my body is not something I offer around like a tray of canapes.'

And why not?'

'Why not? Why not? Because I happen to set some store by it.'

'So,' I trumpeted, 'why do you need Davey to give you a sense of worth if you already have one?'

'Oh, for heaven's sake. Of all the cheap . . .'

'You've made it extremely plain that my offer of love and companionship is a far lower offer than you consider you have the right to expect. You value your body and your favours far above mine.'

299

Stephen Fry

There's a big difference between valuing my body and valuing myself. You didn't offer me love and compan­ionship, you asked me to lie out and be licked.'

'Which is a man's clumsy way of asking for love; as well you must know. If I had said that you were the most beautiful woman I had laid eyes on for years and that I most desperately wanted you near me, you'd think I was taking pity on you. Thursdays are pretty good for me/ I said and buggered off, leaving her to stew.

I headed for the Villa Rotunda, notebook and pencil in one hand, sherry-glass in the other. Clouds were gath­ering on the sky-line and the long-promised bad weather looked to be approaching at last. Clouds boiled in me too and rumbles of thunder sounded in my head.

It was dark and cool inside the summerhouse. I sat on the wooden box of croquet mallets and fired up a Rothie. The last two days, I make no bones about it, had left me feeling bewildered and isolated. On the first page of the notebook I began to write down a list of the contradic­tions that were driving such hard nails into my mind.

They say writing lists is anal, the mark of an 'anal retentive'. I am almost certain no one who uses that moronic phrase has the least idea what it means. The critic Edward Wilson once described Charles Dickens as an 'anal dandy'. I don't suppose he knew what the fuck he was talking about either. Listing things, as I do with words when preparing a poem for instance, seems to me to be a far cry from a compulsion to store objects in my bottom. Only the other day Oliver and I had been admir-

300

The Hippopotamus

ing the new Swafford Hall writing-paper that Michael had ordered from Smythson's in Bond Street and which Podmore had distributed on bureaux and tables in the bedrooms, book rooms and drawing rooms of the house.

'Ooh, I just think stationery is so delightfully anal!' he had squeaked. Oliver that is, not Podmore.

'Why analT I had asked testily. 'Why not renal or cranial or pulmonary or nasal or testicular? I mean, what on earth has it got to do with arses? It makes no sense/

'Don't be difficult, dear. Everyone knows that stationery is anal. It's an established fact.'

We go through phases in infancy of wanting to lodge things either in our mouths or in our bottoms, we are told. We develop into orally or anally retentive types. As a smoker, drinker, guzzler and biter of biro ends, I might be considered oral. I can understand that: the above-stated itemries are all taken by mouth. Apparently, however, as a drawer-up of lists and a lover of good-quality paper, I am also anal. Does that make sense? Of course not. What possible use do such categorisations have, beyond provid­ing people like Oliver with an opportunity to make flip dinner-party remarks?

Anal, my arse. I like my lists. This particular list was very important. Compiling a list for me is like laying out a formal garden in the rubbishy wilderness of my mind. Anal. Pah.

I chewed the end of the pencil, orally retaining several cedar-wood splinters, and then I began to write.

301

Stephen Fry

1. Edward, Jane, Lilac and now, possibly, Oliver have apparently been cured by David's placing his hands upon them.

2. A hot hand placed on a human body is, surely, no different to a hot compress, a hot flannel or, come to that, a hot buttered tea-cake placed on a human body. If heat alone could treat cancer and asthma and heart disease, then the medical world would have told us about it.

3. Therefore David's hands are transmitting some power other than heat.

4. My understanding is that electricity, magnetism and gravity are the only physical fields of force in the universe. A molecule or an atom, or whatever they are called, cannot be moved by any other power. Well, there are a couple of others, but they only exist on paper.

5. The only other force worth considering, I have always held, is the creative force in man, such as might write a poem or right a wrong.

6. There is such a thing as the power of suggestion, however. One human mind is capable of being hypnotised or persuaded by another. We have faith, we have Hitler, we have advertising. But faith

302

The Hippopotamus

healing? Come off it. Pain may be mental illusion, but tumours and clotted arteries are not. Besides, there's the vet and, it would seem, Jane's doctors.

7. If all this is true: if David is capable of changing molecular structure - for this is what we are discussing - then the world should know about it.

8. I am David's godfather. What do I think of the morality of allowing him to be (a) splashed all over the newspapers, (b) pushed back and forth between scientists and fanatics determined either to prove him a fraud or to overblow his gifts?

9. What do I mean 'gifts'? Gifts are things that are given. That necessitates a giver. Why should God waste his time giving the power to heal? What happened to free will and the duty of man to get on with life without the impertinent interference of his creator? And what about the millions who will die every year never having been given a chance to be healed by David? Children in Africa with eaten-away faces? Paraplegics in Peru? Lepers in Libya? The blind in Bali and the deaf in Delhi? It's senseless, senseless, absolutely senseless. Even the flawed and spiteful God we have wouldn't be cruel enough to give his children just a handful of healers to go around four billion.

303

Stephen Fry

10. And if God did give us a healer he'd be damned sure that the one chosen would do more than heal. They'd preach abstinence and salvation and hell-fire or some such damned thing to go along with it. Whereas all David does is witter on about half-arsed namby-pamby Green crap and dribble a load of maundering pantheistic bollocks about Nature and Purity.

11. There again. Music is a gift. Painting is a gift. Even poetry is a gift. Palpable talents and charisms enough exist which improve man's fate on earth, why not one of healing? It may be that the giver is not God, but genetics and evolution. After all, there is evidence that David's power is congeni­tal, inherited indeed, as are the gifts of many musicians.

12. But. But, but, but. To be a great musician the gift alone is not enough. You must live amongst men and suffer and understand. Above all you must WORK. Nothing of any value that I've ever seen man achieve on this earth has ever been accom­plished without work.

13. Oh yeah? Why are you fighting it so hard, Ted? What's your problem? Face the evidence of your own eyes.

304

The Hippopotamus

14. Evidence of my eyes? What have I actually seen?

15. Oh, come on. Evidence of your own ears, then.

16. Hearsay.

17. It's 'hearsay' to you that Mexico exists. Do you really doubt it?

18. All right. All right. But that still leaves the problem of David. I swore an oath at the font. His father, my friend, looks to me for guidance. For once in his life he doesn't know what to do. I can help.

19. That's right, you can help. You can . . .

I broke off. The sound of voices was approaching. Two people, deep in conversation. They stopped under the open window of the Villa, the rear window that gave out on to the lake.

This, I think, is a quiet spot.' The voice of Max Clifford.

'Very quiet.' The voice of Davey.

I locked myself into a kind of gaping immobility, like an uncoordinated child playing musical statues. They were only yards from where I sat and the smallest sound from inside the summerhouse would be as audible to them as their speech was to me.

'Now then. I'll get right down to it, David. I've seen Oliver this morning.'

305

Stephen Fry

No reply.

'He wouldn't say what had happened, but it's clear that something has. Something of a similar nature to the extraordinary recovery that Mary and I witnessed in your cousin Jane earlier this year/

It's quite true. Oliver's heart is mended now.'

Clifford gave an admiring laugh.

Amazing. Quite amazing.'

'It's not really amazing, you know. Not to me.'

'I suppose these activities take something out of you?'

'Yes. As a matter of fact they do take something out of me.'

'It's merely ... I feel rather absurd making this request. I appreciate it's not like asking someone to lend you a book or to baby-sit for the evening.'

'You can ask me anything you like, Max.'

'My daughter Clara has . . . certain things wrong with her.'

'I'm sure I can help her, Max.'

'She's not ill exactly, but she is, well, odd. She's so awkward and clumsy and . . .'

And unhappy'

'Very difficult to take her out anywhere. People stare, you know. The strabismus and the buck-teeth are bad enough. But she makes absolutely no effort to be grace­ful or . . .'

'Yes, I know. I would be very happy to see her and do what I can.'

306

The Hippopotamus

'I don't know exactly what your technique is. If Mary and I could help in any way?'

'Well, the thing is, Max. You have to trust me, you see. I would rather that you weren't present when I am with her.'

'Of course, of course. Whatever you say. But you are fully up to strength? I mean, you're not an especially strong boy by the looks of you. We don't want to exhaust you.'

•I am quite strong really. My spirit is very quickly replenished. So long as I don't waste it.'

'Splendid.'

They fell into a silence. I stretched a cramped leg out as noiselessly as I could. Perhaps they had walked away. I contemplated rising and going over to the window to peep down. Then I heard the sound of a pebble splash­ing into the lake and decided that they were still there. Another couple of pebbles were thrown before David spoke.

'What have you said to Clara about me?'

'Well, we did mention that it was a possibility that you would like to help her.'

'And how does she feel about that?'

'Clara is fourteen years old and will do as she is told,' Max said sharply. He must have realised how callous this sounded, for he quickly added, 'Not that she needs to be told, 1 should say. No, she's very keen. Her squint and her teeth and her bloody uncoordinated gawking. They are a great trial to her. To all of us.'

307

Stephen Fry

'Where is she now?'

'With Simon somewhere, according to her mother. Mucking around in the stables. Mucking out in the stables, more likely. Would you like me to send her to you?'

This afternoon if that would be all right. After lunch.'

'Yes. Yes, you should eat first, I expect. Er, where exactly will you do it?'

'I'm not sure, Max. Perhaps we might go for a walk. But it really has to be private. We must be absolutely alone.'

As you say, as you say . . . I'm very grateful. Mary and I are both very . . .'

Max's voice faded and I was left, once more, to myself.

I turned back to my notebook and completed, for the time being, my list.

20. I may have the evidence of my own eyes soon. Best, I think, to suspend judgement until then.

I looked in on Michael before lunch. He was dictating a letter. Smoother and more assured he looked than when last we had talked. His business face, I supposed. He appeared to be pleased to see me. There again, he had appeared to be pleased to see me the week before when, as I now knew, he had in fact been excessively vexed by my presence. For all I know, no one in the world has ever been pleased to see me, but some have been better at hiding it than others.

Ahoy, Tedward! And how goes the morning?'

308

The Hippopotamus

'Just wanted a word, Michael.'

Thank you, Valerie. I'll talk to Mr Wallace now.'

'Yes, Lord Logan.'

Valerie slipped out, closing the door behind her.

'So, what do you hear, what do you say?'

I sat down in the chair opposite the desk. 'You've heard about Oliver?'

Michael sighed and drummed his fingers against the side of his head.

'Annie was in here. Very upset. She said she had told Davey yesterday not to see anyone without telling her first. She is furious that he disobeyed. “Of course he disobeyed!” I said to her. “If my Uncles had told me, when I was his age, 'Don't do any more work on the shop, Michael. Sit and listen to the wireless or read a book, but no more thinking about business and customers and money,' do you think I would have taken any notice? Never on your life.” But Annie was not satisfied.' Michael sighed again and unzipped a fresh cigar. 'So tell me, Tedward, what do you think now?'

'What do I think? I don't know. However . . .' I smiled a conspiratorial smile, 'I may know later today'

He frowned. 'Later today? So what happens later today?'

'Michael, do you mind if I don't tell you? I won't let anything occur which shouldn't occur, you have my word.'

'And do I have your word that your word is worth anything?'

309

Stephen Fry

'I like to think it's worth at least the air it's spoken with.'

Logan grunted his assent.

'You're going to talk to Davey, then?' he asked.

'Perhaps/ I said. 'I'll let you know this evening.'

'Jane will be here by then. She comes down this after­noon.'

'Yes, I know/ I said. 'We shall have a full house: queens and knaves.'

Logan rose and we repaired for a pre-lunch sip in the library where Oliver's friskiness and excessive show of good health quite put me off my schooner of fino.

IV

Meals at Swafford gather in formality during the day. This is common in the grander houses of the kingdom. I expect Levi-Strauss or Margaret Mead, were they living, could explain this phenomenon by stripping away the lacquer of smart country-house tradition to reveal a solid anthropological teak of tribal taboo beneath - as it is we shall no doubt have to look to arse-witted Sunday-paper style-writers for explanation. Breakfast, to the delight of my traditionalist self, is, as it should be, a more or less servantless affair, Podmore only coming in with fresh coffee and toast when summoned by screams or bells. The sideboard is topped with a row of gleaming tureenery containing, in addition to the bacon, eggs, sausages, mushrooms and wrinkly fried tomatoes we

310

The Hippopotamus

might expect; the three great K's of English breakfast lore - Kedgeree, Kippers and Kidneys (keenly devilled); the length of the dining-table is rhythmically dotted with dishes of marmalade, with pots of coffee and tea, with silver toast-racks and jugs slopping to their crys­tal brims with the juice of orange, tomato and grape­fruit. A Hepplewhite satinwood side table is matutinally spread by Podmore into a fan of national and local newspapers. Periodicals are provided too, The Spectator, Private Eye, The Oldie, Country Life, The Field, Norfolk Fair, The Illustrated London News, The Economist, Investors Chronicle and Beano for the twins. It is my custom, as I have said, to contrive to come down last and have the room to myself. I stay there for an hour or so, until the first easings of mid-morning flatulence push me to the lavatory. If St Peter were to ask in what time or place I should like eternally to be suspended for the infinite length of my heavenly career, I could certainly choose half past ten on a summer's morning in the dining room of Swafford Hall.

Dinner, when guests are invited from outside, is a formal full-fig feast. The ladies slip into off-the-shoulder frocks and the staff into over-the-shoulder modes of food dispensal - white gloves, fork-and-spoon service, efful­gent napkins wrapped about the bottle necks. Wine and conversation flow, cheeks and candles glow. Even when the house interns alone are present, a certain elegance of protocol is maintained. The women are taken in draped on the arms of their men at eight and shag off en masse

311

Stephen Fry

for coffee in the drawing room at elevenish, leaving the hairy element to crack nuts and jokes over the port. This much-maligned procedure, Simon told me the other day originated in Victorian days when women were anxious to keep from their husbands, brothers and sons the alarm­ing news that they possessed bladders and urinary tracts. Whatever its basis, I find the custom highly satisfactory. Anne has the delightful habit of calling us into the draw­ing room, when she believes the sexes have been segre­gated for long enough, by performing gentle Schumann sonatas on the piano. One loves to play at being civilised, but one does need rich friends to meet the rising costs of such an exercise. Civilisation, after all, is not an atti­tude of mind, it is an attribute of wealth. Dinners at Swafford, to my mind, are very nearly as fine as break­fasts.

Luncheon lies between these two in ceremony as in chronology. The library serves as the muster station and pre-prandial lapping-pool of choice; thence we are gonged to the dining room for solids. Podmore brings in the dishes and dumps them at Anne's end for her to dole out down the table. It is the quickest meal, puddings are often sent back untouched, the imbibal of anything stronger than iced water is uncommon and conversation tends to the stilted. The British are uneasy about domes­tic weekday lunches; the work ethic is in us ingrained so deep that even the leisured classes like to behave as though midday eating is a tiresome intrusion on a life of toil and honest diligence.

312

The Hippopotamus

As we made our way into the dining room on this day my appetite already ruined by Oliver's rude health and Anne's distraught demeanour, the atmosphere within doors crackled with the same kind of tension as prevailed without. It is a mark, I have often noticed, of God's cheap sense of literary cliche that he so often chooses to provide climatic conditions that reflect our inmost moods. The day of Jane's christening, for instance, which I think of as the Day of Rebecca's Curse, was a streaming, soaking day, to match the sodden weeping that attended it. The weather that accompanied the scene of Helen's depar­ture from my house and life with a screaming Roman and a coldly sniffing Leonora was bone-chillingly frosty, imparting an iced numbness that exactly suited my mood. And the day, if we cast our minds back all those pages ago, that saw my expulsion from the Sunday Shite was clear and warm and free and bright. Today's bristling electric menace, while overdone like all God's effects, could not be said to be inappropriate.

Michael was silent, Anne brittly garrulous. I watched Clara, who in turn cast quick covert glances towards a flushed and expectant David. Simon was, rarely for him, moody and unresponsive. Max contented himself with suave responses to Anne's chatter. Patricia, Rebecca and Oliver wittered about London things. The twins, who might have brought some zest to the table, ate in the nursery. Mary Clifford said nothing, until towards the end of dinner when she tried to press pudding on a reluc­tant Clara.

313

Stephen Fry

'You really should, dear.'

Tm not very hungry Mummy/

'No, but I think a slice of treacle-pie would be a good idea. Don't you, Davey?'

This megalithically foolish remark caused Max to bite his lower lip and Oliver to raise his eyebrows. Davey was about to reply when Simon butted in.

'It's pretty good pie actually, Clara. If you don't finish yours I'll have it, don't you worry.'

'Simon is one of those who can gorge himself like a pig and not have an ounce of flesh to show for it,' said Anne, cutting Clara a slice. 'He's already had three help­ings.'

'It's two actually, Mum,' said Simon sending his plate along for the third. 'Got to keep my strength up, we're moving the pigs out to the fields to glean this afternoon. Do you want to come along, Clara?'

Clara looked helplessly at Simon, her eyes big and watery under their thick lenses.

'Clara and I thought we might go for a walk, Simon,' Max said. 'When you say “glean”,' he went on effort­lessly, 'do you mean they actually get by foraging for themselves, or do you supplement their diets? I've always wanted to know.'

While Simon explained I watched Clara turn with lowered head back to her bowl and poke at her pie in misery. I fancied, this forlorn moment aside, that in fact she looked a little better than she had on arrival at Swafford the previous week. Nature, it seemed to me,

314

The Hippopotamus

was sure to right Clara's defects in time without Davey's mystical interference. Look at American girls. At the age of fourteen they look as if they're recovering from a traf­fic accident: their mouths are caged with wire, their legs and backs strain in corrective stockings and splints, their skin is lumpy from acne, their upper lips fuzz with down, their sad little bras are stuffed with Kleenex and their eyes slither independently in all directions but forwards. Yet by the time they reach eighteen they have become almost too beautiful to bear, with teeth like indigestion tablets, eyes to dive into, skin you want to lick all over, fresh boobs and postures new. No armpit hair, however, which I believe to be a calamitous error. Have you ever let honey-suckle live up to its name? Ever drained its honey? When you take the flower and pull the stamen through, a delicate shining drop of nectar swells up at its head. A bead of sweat bulging at the tip of a woman's axillary hair is as beautiful. Your true connoisseur of women delights in the great meaty reek of the female essence, not the sterile lemon top-notes of deodorants and creams. The French understand this, about the only thing they do understand - apart from French of course. Think of those giddy Baudelaire an amants burying their heads in comedy actresses' sweat-soaked how-dare-yous. Haaa . . .

Please excuse me. We return to the luncheon.

Michael stood. 'You'll forgive my leaving,' he said. 'I have work to do this afternoon. But I trust we'll all be here at four to welcome Janie when she arrives?'

315

Stephen Fry

Nods all round.

I left as soon as possible to commence my stake-out in secrecy. It was a difficult undertaking to reach the Villa Rotunda without being seen from the house. A number of the guests, I knew, would be in the drawing room that overlooked the South Lawn at the back of which the villa stood. I had, therefore, to skirt the entire lawn in a wide loop and achieve the summerhouse from the rear. This necessitated the negotiation of much thick vegetation. The bushes and shrubs had set themselves the happy afternoon task, it soon came to my notice, of attempting to knock from my hand, by the use of cunningly upthrust roots and protruding twigs, the cup of coffee I had foolishly decided to take with me on the journey. By the time I had grunted myself through the rear window of the Villa there was no more than an inch of coffee remaining, much supplemented by garden detri­tus. An inch of after-luncheon coffee, I reflected, is better than a centimetre and I drank it gratefully down, leaf-fragments, thunder-flies, twig-bark and all. None the less, the spillage of so much was shortly to cause me a moment of panic, as I was to discover.

Settling cosily on the croquet trunk once more, I watched a spider swing from the ceiling and pondered, like Robert the Bruce before me, on the problem of effort. To stand up takes effort, to move about takes effort: simply to be still, to do no more than endure, even that takes effort. Effort is expended strength. Strength comes from food. We carry on because we eat.

316

The Hippopotamus

But creative effort? How is that expense replenished? Where does creative energy come from? From food also? Then how can it be that a poet, say who once could write, can suddenly write no more? Not, surely, because he has stopped eating spinach? David thinks he has a creative energy that comes from . . . from God knows what. From nature, from some intricate connecting web, a sustaining field of force such as they talk about in that absurd science-fiction story with Alec Guinness, the one that Roman amazed me by calling an 'old' film . . . may the force be with you ... if that was an old film to Roman - Star Trek, was it called? Something like that -then what was Duck Soup? . . .

'It's burning! It's burning!'

An excited voice outside the window. I leapt to my feet. The coffee cup fell from my lap and smashed on the floor.

Not David's voice. Nor Clara's.

I went to the window and looked out.

There below me were the twins, squatting on the pathway that ran between the rear of the Villa Rotunda and the edge of the lake. One of them had a magnify-ing-glass in his hand, the other was holding a snail. A sizzle of steam rose from a small hole in the snail's shell.

'Hoi!' I shouted.

They turned in guilty alarm and then smiled when they saw who it was.

'Hello, Uncle Ted.'

'We're experimenting.'

317

Stephen Fry

'Well, you shouldn't experiment here/ I said.

The twin holding the magnifying-glass frowned.

'Why not?'

'Because . . .' I sought for a reason. 'Suppose your brother David were to see you. You know what he thinks of cruelty to animals/

'That's all right.'

'Davey's in the woods somewhere.'

'He went with Clara.'

'Ages ago.'

Ages ago? Ages ago? I looked at my watch. Ten past three.

Damn you, Ted, you fat buffalo. Damn you, you great wallowing tit. You've slept for forty minutes. If you'd had a whole, full cup of strong coffee, perhaps . . .

I hurled myself down the front steps of the Villa and round to the twins.

'Where?'

'Where what?'

'Davey and Clara. Where in the woods did they go?'

They shrugged.

'We don't know.'

They pointed across the lake.

'Somewhere.'

'Shall we go and hide and seek them, do you think?'

'No, no. You stay here. I just wanted to . . . catch up with them. Have a word.'

'Right ho.'

'We'll stay here.'

318

The Hippopotamus

'You bet. Well be here.'

'Right here/

'Just exactly here/

I marched off around the lake, cursing my lazy old body. It was entirely my point. Energy. Effort. Where does it go?

I stamped through the damp pong of the lake's edge, my feet tearing up the tangle of glasswort, marshwort, mallows and kingcups beneath. Ahead lay the small wood­land copse where Davey and I had walked on our first day. It was more humid now, the air bursting with vapour and, above, the clouds thickening to the colour of cuttlefish ink.

I stood in this spinney and listened. Larks, chaffinches, thrushes and flies squeaked, chirruped, throstled and buzzed. Small pockets of midge eddied and bounced in the gloomier thickets. I walked towards the darkest, den­sest part of the copse as quietly as a heavy man can when the ground beneath him is carpeted with dried twig and crackling bark.

Somewhere ahead of me I heard David's voice, very low and husky. Bending double, I edged towards the sound, lifting each foot high off the ground and placing it down with all the strained delicacy I could manage. The effort caused me to pant and blow like a steam­roller. Sweat gathered in my eyebrows.

'So you see, the spirit must find a way in,' I heard David's voice explain.

'Spirit like air?' Clara asked.

I came to a stop behind a briar bush and peeped

319

Stephen Fry

through. In a small clearing, less than the length of a long cocktail bar away from my cover, I could see Clara and David, seated on the ground. Clara was sideways on to me but I could see David's face clearly. He was wear­ing charcoal-coloured jeans and a white T-shirt. His knees were drawn up a little and he had laid a hand on Clara's shoulder. I breathed as quietly as I could.

'No, not like air, exactly. You must know about men's spirit. The spirit that makes life.'

Clara giggled. 'What, you mean like . . . spermT

A bead of sweat rolled down and stung my eyes. The light was fading and the air was charged enough to make the skin prickle.

'It isn't a joke, Clara. If this spirit is very pure and very holy, it can make the person receiving it very holy and very pure too.'

Clara stared at him. 'You aren't going to . . .'

I swallowed. This was not what I had been expecting. Not what I had been expecting at all.

'I've been thinking. You see, the problems you would like me to help you with are all up here.'

David traced his fingers around her face.

'Usually, you see, I would implant the spirit deep within you . . .'

I suddenly thought about Oliver's piles at breakfast and wanted to choke. A warm fat drop fell on my head with a slap. Blast, I thought. Some fucking wood-pigeon. Another drop landed on my arm. Rain.

'. . . but I think what would be best in your case,'

320

The Hippopotamus

David continued, 'would be for the spirit to be intro­duced here.'

He ran a thumb between Clara's lips.

'You mean I'd have to drink it?'

David sighed. It was apparent to me that he was not finding the naivete of Clara's response at all sympathetic.

'Your father explained, didn't he? He told you that I have the power to help people. He told you to trust me and to do what I said, didn't he?'

Clara nodded. She did not appear to be happy.

'The way to take in the spirit is for me to suckle you, as a loving mother might suckle her young.'

Clara did not reply.

'You must think of how the pure living spirit will enter you and make you whole. It will heaLyour eyes and your teeth. It will fill you with power and beauty.'

'What will it taste like?'

Splendid child. I found myself taking to her very much. Poetry lies in practical detail.

'It will taste of everything you love. Of honey and sweet warm milk.'

'Aniseed?'

'If you like aniseed it will taste of aniseed.'

'I hate aniseed.'

'Well then, it won't taste of aniseed. What is your favourite flavour?'

'Worcester sauce.'

'Mm . . .' David paused. I could imagine him wonder­ing how much conviction it would carry if he claimed

321

Stephen Fry

that his pure holy river of spirit would indeed taste of Worcester sauce. 'Your mind will create whatever flavour it desires/ was the best he could come up with.

'Will it look like Worcester sauce, then?'

'Never mind how it will look!' David was becoming exasperated.

'It's starting to rain, now/

'The rain is good. It's clean and pure and quite warm.'

I edged further forward for shelter in the bush; the bramble around me combing my hair with violent scratches.

David had mastered his irritation and spoke now in a calm hypnotic coo.

'Clara. You have been told to trust me and you trust me. You have been told I will help and I will help. I will lie back like this, all right? Now, I'm going to take your hand and put it here, just on my jeans like this.'

'What's that?'

'You know what that is. You must know, surely? Just feel it for a moment. Feel how warm and firm it is. It is where the spirit comes from. That's right.'

Clara's body obscured my view of the details of this woodland scene. I could see David's face looking up to the trees and his toes curling in their shoes. I could see Clara's shoulders and the back of her arm. A rumble of thunder sounded far away and the rain began to spank the leaves.

'Now,' he said. 'Just undo me here and . . . that's it. Gently though.'

322

The Hippopotamus

'Is this what they all look like?'

'Surely you've seen one before?'

'A girl at school showed me a magazine. It didn't have this loose skin though.'

'OW! CAREFUL!'

'What have I done? What have I done?'

'No, no. It's all right. But you must be more gentle. It's extremely sensitive, you see. So, nice and easy.'

'It's very hot.'

'Yes, that's right. It is. Very hot. The heat comes from the spirit that is going to make you well and whole. Now, I want you to bring your head down.'

'I don't like to . . .'

'Clara ... it's very simple.'

'But that's where you do . . .'

'What?'

'That's where you do pee-pees.'

'Clara, please! It is completely clean. So clean that it can purify your whole body. You have to trust me. What would your father say if I told him you had failed to trust me?'

'All right, then . . .'

Through the riot of brambles I saw her head dip down and David's right hand press against the nape of her neck.

'Easily,' said David. I imagine he was grateful that the girl's teeth protruded outwards, not in.

'Wimbledon,' she replied, or so it sounded to my ears. It may be that she said something else. I supposed that

323

Stephen Fry

any word spoken under those circumstances would come out as Wimbledon.

'Birmingham!' she said, proving me wrong.

'Drain the spirit/ said David, the downward-facing palm of his free hand clutching and releasing the litter of the spinney floor. The rain was falling fast now, bounc­ing from a tree-stump beside his head. 'Yes. Don't stop. Keep going. Yes. At any moment ... at any moment you will feel the spirit . . .'

Any moment? Christ the young are extraordinary. I would have had to lie there for half an hour just to warm myself up.

'Yes . . . yes . . . yes . . . yes!' David's voice rose into song. But suddenly, with a violence more powerful than that of the thunder rolling in the distance, a deep voice bellowed from out of the darkness behind them.

'NO!! NO!! LET HER GO!!'

Four things happened at once.

Ted Wallace fell forward into the bramble bush in surprise and tore his wrist on the brambles.

David howled in agony.

Clara tore her face from David's lap, a stream of crim­son and cream bubbling in her mouth.

Simon crashed through the bushes and hurled himself into the clearing, his face white with rage.

I pulled myself free of the thorns and watched as Clara staggered forwards into Simon's arms, gagging and sobbing. David sat up and stared down at the torn and bleeding mess in his lap. His magic pecker seemed, luckily for him,

324

The Hippopotamus

to be in one piece, but Clara's lower teeth had scraped a gash along the underside and peeled back a curl of flesh.

Simon, one hand holding Clara's head against his shoul­der, looked across at his brother. His shoulders heaved and his tongue flicked across his lips as he searched for words. The rain streamed down between them and the wild electric smell of freshly soaked forest rose from the floor.

At last Simon found utterance.

'Physicist . . .' he shouted, '. . . heal thyself

Poor old Simon, illiterate as ever.

He turned and spoke in Clara's ear, as the approach­ing thunder shook the copse.

'We can't have you going into the house looking like this. Come on, I'll take you to Jarrold's cottage. You can clean up there.'

Clara clung to him as they left the clearing. The front of her dress was soaked and stained with rainwater, blood, semen and lumps of freshly vomited treacle-pie.

'You can't leave me like this!' Davey shouted after them. 'Simon1. Come back!'

They disappeared into the wood. David rocked himself backwards and forwards, the rain flattening the hair against his scalp.

There sat a child, I supposed, much in need of a god­father. Sighing, I took a handkerchief from my pocket and stood up. He watched my approach silently, quiver­ing like a snared rabbit. His breath caught the upper register of his vocal cords as he inhaled with huge gasps.

325

Stephen Fry

'You saw?' he managed to say

'Don't talk/ I said. 'Not a bloody word. Can you stand?' He took my arm and struggled upwards, wincing like the very dickens. Poor fucker.

326

8

When Gordon Fell was knighted in 1987 he threw a celebration binge afterwards at the Savoy. Not the Dominion Club of course, as it should have been, but the Savoy. Well, no matter. During the party he described to us the ceremony at Buckingham Palace. Gordie hadn't been the only man there that morning to be knighted, naturally. The Queen contrives to process dozens of candi­dates in one hit. They are disposed, it would seem, in rows of chairs, as at a lecture, while a band of the Guards plays anus-contractingly inappropriate tunes like 'A Spoonful of Sugar' and 'Chitty Chitty Bang Bang' in the background. Gordon was due to kneel and be dubbed next in line after the self-important fool sitting beside him. This pompous little pip-squeak had wriggled his way into the chairmanship of some large charity or another and was now coming to collect what he regarded as his due reward.

The figure had introduced himself with pride and whis­pered, after Gordon had told him his name, And what do you do, then? The diplomatic, is it?'

Tm a painter,' Gordie said.

'Really?' said the fellow. 'Not one of those awful moderns, I hope.'

327

Stephen Fry

'Oh no/ said Gordon. 'Of course I'm not a modern painter. I was born in the sixteenth fucking century, wasn't I? I'm an Old Master, me.'

Not quite Buck House language perhaps, but justifi­able under the circumstances. The chap turned his shoul­der on Gordie, disgusted that he could be sharing an honour with such an animal. Gordon pointedly scratched his groin and yawned.

Anyway, the turn came for the charity weasel to kneel and be serviced. It so fell out that his investiture into the Knights Commander of the Crawling Toads, or whatever order it was that he was in line for, took place unaccom­panied by melody, the band being engaged in taking the sheet music of 'Consider Yourself off their stands and replacing it with 'Born Free'. Her Maj's sword tapped the man's shoulders in hushed silence and he rose to an upright position with becoming dignity, bowing his head with a crisp snap that would have shamed an equerry. As he did so his nervous, uptight and excitable system delivered itself of an astoundingly sustained and quite startlingly loud fart. The monarch stepped backwards, which was all part of the programme as it happened, but which seemed to everyone present to be an involuntary reaction to the man's violent rip. The expression on his face as he trailed miserably down the aisle was one of deepest woe. Every person in the room stared at him or, worse, waited until he was level with them and then averted their eyes. Gordon, passing him in the aisle as he made his own way to the steps of the throne, murmured in a growl audible to all,

328

The Hippopotamus

'Don't worry, old boy. She'll be used to it. Keeps plenty of dogs and horses, don't forget.'

The lips of the Queen, according to Gordie, were seen to curve into a smile at this and she detained him in conver­sation for longer than anyone else. When he returned to his seat next to the still-scarlet farter, Sir Gordon rasped out, in time with the band which was now operative again, 'Bo-orn free, a-free as the WIND BLOWS.'

Being the vindictive sod he is, Gordie didn't stop there, naturally. In the melee of press that gathered outside the palace and especially around him, he was asked how the occasion had gone.

That man over there,' Gordon said, pointing at the chap, who was standing with his wife and only a photog­rapher from a local Hampshire newspaper to bolster his self-esteem, 'let out the most extraordinary fart, virtu­ally in the sovereign's face. Quite astonishing. Some kind of anarchist, I suppose.'

The pack flew to the spot like flies to a cow-pat and the pathetic creature was last seen streaking down the Mall, his silk topper bouncing on the pavement behind him. He lost his hat, his reputation and in all probabil­ity his wife in one Gordon Fell swoop. Never insult a painter. Not worth it.

I had always reckoned that this man's experiences counted as the most embarrassing a human being could undergo. I had not known, however, what God had in store for me that stormy Norfolk afternoon.

I walked a wincing David to the edge of the west drive

329

Stephen Fry

as the rain streamed down upon us. Slow progress: he was bent forward, the handkerchief pressed to his groin, and capable only of shuffling geriatric steps. We got there in the end and I told him to shelter under a tree until I returned. Back at the house the first person I bumped into was Rebecca.

Ted, for heaven's sake!' she hooted. 'You look as if you've just emerged from a swamp/

'Don't have time to talk, Rebecca/ I said. 'Can you save a life and lend me your car?'

'Why?'

'I'll explain later. Bloody urgent. Please.'

She shrugged. 'Help yourself, darling. It's round the back.'

'Bless you. And, Rebecca? Another boon. Simon will be returning to the house in the next half-hour or so. I wonder if you could give him this note?'

I grabbed a sheet of house writing-paper, scribbled a message for Simon and sealed it in an envelope.

'Dark, dark mysteries,' said Rebecca.

'Terribly important, old carrot. You won't forget? Promise?'

She promised.

And the car-keys?'

'Under the visor.'

I hadn't driven since the army, and even then spar­ingly. In those days you passed your test by going to the adjutant and signing a piece of paper which entitled you to command any vehicle from a motor-bicycle to a three-

330

The Hippopotamus

ton lorry. I didn't doubt I would manage, however. When I considered the number of dickwits who seemed capa­ble of perfectly competent driving, Simon for example, I couldn't believe that it would be beyond me.

Rebecca's Mercedes was under cover in the garage behind the stable yard, a convertible with the blasted roof down. Electric roof at that. After fiddling hopelessly with the ignition key for five minutes - fucking thing wouldn't even turn - I hared off to find Tubby. He got the car started and roof up, quick as pigshit.

I contrived, with great discomfort, to fit my belly under the steering-wheel only to encounter my first problem.

The fucking thing's only got two pedalsl' I yelled.

That's automatic,' said Tubby.

He wasted ten valuable minutes in painstakingly explaining the workings and I edged out of the garage and headed for the west drive as fast as I could. I reached it without actual collision on the way, but it was a near thing, the edge of the park being liberally furnished with stone Portland vases and quaint rustic benches. I could barely see: the rain was still coursing down and I hadn't the faintest idea where the windscreen-wiper switch could possibly be hidden.

I slewed to a halt at the end of the drive, churning up mud as the car skidded on to the grass of the park itself.

Davey was lying under a cedar, motionless.

Fuck, I thought. He's been struck by lightning. Should never have told him to shelter under a tree.

It was not as bad as that. He had fainted, but not, I

331

Stephen Fry

decided; from loss of blood. The handkerchief was stained, but not swamped. I bent down and tried to lift him. Not a heavy boy but too much for me. Matters would not be helped by discs slipping and joints locking up.

'Davey!' I called in his ear. 'Wake up. Wake up, Davey wake up.'

His eyes flickered open and he stared at me.

'Come on, boy. You've got to try and stand. I've got us a car and we're going to a hospital. Get you put right.'

He tried to get to his feet too quickly as though there had been nothing wrong with him. The pain caught up with him sharply and he fell against me with a whim­per. From that half-standing position I was able at least to drag him to the car and push, lever and pack him into the passenger seat.

'Oh, Uncle Ted/ he kept saying. 'Uncle Ted, Uncle Ted.'

'Shi I've got to concentrate on this fucking car.'

'On the string common/ he woozed like a drunkard.

'What?'

'On the . . . steering . . . column. The windscreen-wipers. There.'

The wipers helped, but it was still a nightmare drive. The road threw up the most tremendous mist of water and some deep memory inside me kept prompting my left foot to attempt a clutch manoeuvre when I wanted to slow down. The only pedal for it to meet was the brake, on which it would stamp with great force, caus-

332

The Hippopotamus

ing us to aquaplane on the spray to the hooting terror of the traffic.

David seemed to be amused by my oaths and grunts and remained alert enough to direct me to the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital.

It was only as we slid to a stop outside the doors of the casualty entrance that a true realisation of the fraught nature of this call impressed itself upon me. Michael would expect me to manage this without involving him or his family in any publicity. I turned to David.

'Whatever I say by way of explanation, Davey you must remember and repeat. Do you understand?'

He looked at me dumbly.

'What?'

■I will explain who you are and how you came by this accident. You will not diverge from my explanation by one syllable. Do you understand? We don't want Clara dragged into this. Nor your parents if we can help it.'

'What are you going to say?'

'I don't fucking know yet, love, do I? Oh, now what?'

A knuckle was being rapped against the glass on my side of the car by a man in a bright-yellow plastic waistcoat. Unable to find a way to wind down the window, I opened the door, pushing the man off balance and into a puddle. I heaved myself out of the car and went to his aid.

'I'm terribly sorry . . . terribly sorry. Oh dear, oh God. You're all wet.'

'You can't park here,' he said, ignoring this frippery incidental. 'Ambulances only'

333

Stephen Fry

This is an emergency/ I said. 'Besides, I don't know how to park. If I left the car here, you wouldn't be kind enough to put it somewhere for me, would you?'

1 beg your pardon?'

I went around the bonnet and helped Davey out of the car.

"Ere!' the fellow shouted. 'I'm not going to . . .' He caught sight of the crimson hankie pressed to the fork of David's jeans and the words of recrimination died on his lips. 'You'd best hurry in,' he said. 'The car'll be round the back. You can pick the keys up from my booth.'

One is always hearing a great deal of liberal waffle about the terrible state of the National Health Service. Waiting lists, cuts, low morale: you can't help but soak up the thrust of the moronic yapping we have to put up with every day from the professionally disenchanted and humourlessly self-righteous wankers of the left. Even a sceptical old reactionary like me is, willy-nilly, influ­enced by this kind of talk into imagining that all NHS institutions are crowded with desperately sick patients lying about in the corridors on straw palliasses waiting for the health authority's one overworked, under-rested teenage doctor to come and tell them to pull themselves together.

Not a bit of it. Not a bloody bit of it. It may be that the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital is an exception - East Anglia, it must be admitted, cannot be described as an area of massive inner-city tension; one supposes the aver­age medical emergency involves bumpkins bitten by

334

The Hippopotamus

coypus or tourists overdosed on flapjacks and churches. I expected, none the less, to find at least a measure of squalor and overworked hysteria. But when Davey and I walked in through the automatic electrically operated doors and reported to the reception desk I felt less like a soldier dragging his wounded comrade into the filthy Crimean field-hospital of popular left-wing imagination and more like Richard Burton checking in to a five-star hotel in Gstaad with a tipsy Elizabeth Taylor on his arm.

'Oh dear oh dear,' clucked the little granny behind the desk. 'Someone's been in the wars, haven't they?'

This young fellow has met with an accident,' I said with a hearty wink. 'Usual thing, you know. Caught the old man in his zipper, poor sod.'

'Whoops!' she said. 'I'd better have your names then.'

'Ah, Edward Lennox.'

Davey's eyebrows rose.

'And your son's name?'

'David,' I said. 'His name is David.'

'Do you have David's National Insurance card with you, by any chance?'

'Oh lor, came straight out without thinking of it, I'm afraid.'

'That's all right, dear. You can fill in a form later. Meanwhile, if you wouldn't mind taking a seat, a doctor will be out to see you as soon as possible.'

'Got that?' I hissed to David as we sat down. 'David Lennox. Accident while peeing.'

He nodded. He was very pale, his hair was still damp

335

Stephen Fry

and his lower lip oozed blood from where he had been gnawing at it in pain.

He sat there not speaking; just staring blankly at the clock on the wall.

'You'll be fine/ I said, interpreting his silence as fear. They'll know what to do. Probably happens every day.'

The thing is . . .' said David.

'Yes?'

These jeans. They are 501 's.'

'501's? I don't understand.'

A nurse was walking towards us, radiating welcome, confidence and disinfectant.

'David Lennox?'

The thing about 501 's,' whispered David urgently into my ear as he stood, 'is that they have a button-fly, not a zip.'

He was led away and I sat there punching my thigh with an angry fist.

Bloody American fashion. Fuck it. Fuck them all. Button-fly? Who ever heard of such a thing? Button-flies were for demob suits and old wedding trousers. Button-fly? Buggering fuckery-cunt, this was going to be just wonderful. Button-fly. Absurd.

After twenty minutes of this lonely fury, a tall white-coated woman with steel-grey hair gathered in a vicious bun strode towards me, a dangerous light in her cold blue eyes.

'Mr Lennox?'

'Yup, that's me.'

336

The Hippopotamus

'Dr Fraser. I wonder if I might have a word with you?'

'Yes, yes. Absolutely. Absolutely. How's Davey doing?'

This way, please. I have a small office.'

I followed obediently beguiling the time on our short walk by making amusing observations on the weather and the state of the traffic, just like a real grown-up daddy.

Dr Fraser - Margaret Fraser if the identity tag attached to her coat was to be believed - closed the door of the office behind her and pointed to a seat.

'Mr Lennox,' she said as I sat down, 'I wonder if you would be good enough to tell me the nature of your relationship with David?'

'Well,' I said breezily, 'some days good, some days bad. You know what adolescents are like.'

'That's not quite what I mean, Mr Lennox,' she said, going round to sit behind the desk. 'You are the boy's father, is that correct?'

'For my sins.'

'Perhaps you can explain, then,' she undipped a biro from her breast pocket, 'why David should say to me: “The pain got worse in the car, partly because Uncle Ted is such a terrible driver.” Those were his words, Mr Lennox. “Uncle Ted”.'

'Really?'

'Really. Now why should a son call his father “Uncle”, I wonder?'

'Well, I say “father”, but I mean godfather, obviously.'

337

Stephen Fry

'Godfather?'

'Godfather/ my voice sounded dry and reedily inade­quate, 'you know, which is like a father, isn't it?'

'You are not related to David?'

'Not really'

'Not really. I see.'

As if making out a prescription, she took a small white notepad from a drawer in the desk and started to write on it.

'Why,' she asked as she wrote, 'obviously?'

'I'm sorry?'

'You just told me that when you said father you meant godfather, “obviously”. Why obviously?'

'Well . . .' I began to feel a great need for a Rothie, 'I suppose it isn't that obvious, now you come to mention it. You being outside the family, nothing would seem obvious to you, would it? I mean, other people's lives . . . mystery. Blank mystery. Wouldn't you say?'

'But you're outside the family too, it would seem.'

'Ah well . . . yes. In that sense. Mm.'

'David's injury, according to the papers from the front desk, was sustained when he caught his penis in a zipper.'

Penis, what a ghastly word. Not right from a tall woman with chilly eyes and solid breasts.

'Yes, zipper, that's right.'

'Although the jeans he is wearing . . .'

'Have a button-fly. Yes, well, obviously he changed out of the original trousers.'

1 Obviously again?'

338

The Hippopotamus

'Well, there he is, you know. Having a pee, catches the pecker. I didn't know what to do. So I rushed and got another pair of trousers for him and then . . .'

'You were present when he was urinating?'

'No, well, obvi . . . naturally, he called out, didn't he? I rushed up . . .'

'Up?'

'To the bathroom . . .'

'All this took place in a bathroom?'

'Yes! In a bathroom. What did you expect, a bakery? A hair-dressing salon?'

She wrote down a few words.

Her silence and patience were excessively irritating. I moved a hand to the pocket of my jacket.

'I hope you aren't thinking of smoking, Mr Lennox?' she said without looking up. 'This is a hospital.'

I sighed. She spoke again, still writing.

'Why are David's clothes so soaked, I wonder?'

'It's been raining, Dr Fraser. It's been raining for most of the afternoon. Or hadn't you noticed?'

'Yes, Mr Lennox. I had noticed. Such weather causes us to be very busy with serious accidents, Mr Lennox.' I was beginning to hate the way she kept repeating the name. 'But to return to your story. As I understand it, David's little misadventure took place in a bathroom? I can understand, at a stretch, why he might change trousers after his accident, but why he should then stand outside in the rain . . .'

'I had to get the car out, didn't I? Look, why all these

339

Stephen Fry

questions? Surely this kind of thing must happen often enough . . .'

'I am happy to be able to tell you, Mr Lennox, that it is in fact pleasantly rare for a child to be admitted to this hospital with human bite-marks to the penis.'

'Ah.'

'Yes. It is even more rare for a busy casualty surgeon to be obliged to listen to stories of bathrooms, urination, zippers and changed trousers when it is plain to the mean­est intelligence that the mud-, semen- and blood-stained jeans and hysterical state of the boy in question tell quite another story/

'Ah/ I said, Veil . . .'

'What makes this case rare still is the fact that the child has been brought into casualty by a man I immed­iately recognised as the poet E. L. Wallace, but who gives his name as plain Edward Lennox.'

'Well, for goodness' sake, if you knew who I was in the first place . . .'

'This E. L. Wallace claims to be the boy's father/ she went on, 'and when this is exposed as a complete fabri­cation, he asks me to believe that it was “obvious” that he meant he was really only the godfather.'

'Which I am.'

'I think, Mr Wallace,' she said, resting her chin on her hands, 'that you should tell me the name of the child's real parents now, don't you?'

I ignored this question. 'I'd like to speak to Davey, please.'

340

The Hippopotamus

1 am sure that the police, when I ring them, would disapprove of my allowing you to do any such thing.'

The police? Have you run mad? What on earth have the police got to do with anything?'

Tlease don't shout, Mr Wallace.'

Tm sorry, but look . . .' I leaned forward and lowered my voice. 'All right. Let's talk as grown-ups and mature people of the world now, shall we? I confess that the story about the zip was a little bit of a white lie. But surely, just because a pair of lovers suffer an unfortunate mishap . . .'

'David is fifteen years old, Mr Wallace. I have no doubt that in the Bohemian world that you inhabit . . .'

'Yes, yes, yes. Never mind about your rancid second­hand ideas of Bohemia. The young must be allowed to experiment surely? I mean . . .'

'I have a boy of David's age myself, Mr Wallace!'

'Well, if it comes to that, Dr Fraser, so do I.'

She looked at me aghast. 'You do?'

'Certainly. And if the same thing happened to him, do you think I would kick up a great stink about it? Of course not. Make a fuss and the whole thing gets blown up out of proportion. You know what the young are like. Guilt, resentment, anger, aggression. No, no. The last thing in the world you should do is make some big deal out of it. That's not Bohemianism, that's plain common sense. I absolutely forbid the involvement of the police. And leave the parents out of it too, that's my advice. I'll see him now, if I may.'

341

Stephen Fry

She stared at me with round eyes, the notepad forgot­ten.

'Well!' she said finally. 'I must say for sheer bloody nerve you take first prize, Mr Wallace. This is what is meant by “poetic licence”, is it?'

'Oh, for helPs sake!' I had frankly had it with this stiff-bosomed prude. 'You're a doctor, not a damned social worker. Don't you have some oath that forbids you from gossiping about the private lives of your patients? I mean, Jesus, woman, what is it with this country? Why do bossy creatures like you insist on sticking your inquisitive noses into other people's affairs all the time? Just stitch the boy's prick up, give him some pills and send him on his way. What the hell busi­ness is it of yours how he got his injuries and with whom? Just leave us alone, will you?'

It may interest you to know, Mr Wallace, that I am a magistrate. A Justice of the Peace.'

And a member of Calvinists Against Cocksucking and Housewives Against Fellatio, no doubt. What you do in your private life is a matter of complete indifference to me. And what a young boy does in his should be of equal unimportance to you. You're a doctor, your job is to heal, not to preach.'

She gave me another hostile glare and reached out her hand for the telephone. 'If I don't have the name and address of David's parents this minute, Mr Wallace, I shall call the police.'

I sighed. 'Oh, very well. Very well. And I suppose you

342

The Hippopotamus

want the name of the parents of the girl too, so you can fuck up two families at once, is that it?'

'Girl? What girl?' She stared at me in astonishment.

'What girl, what girl? What do you mean “what girl”? Did you think he was being sucked off by a giraffe, for God's sake?'

'No, Mr Wallace. I assumed that you were the other party/

It was my turn to give the look of pop-eyed amaze­ment.

'WHAT? You thought what?9

'Please, Mr Wallace, lower your voice.'

'You thought I . . .'

Fve spent a lifetime having people of Dr Fraser's stamp throw words like 'Bohemian' at me, but I truly believe that if I have a fault it's that I'm not as dirty-minded as most. They call me a cynic and sceptic too, but that's because when I see a thing I call it what it is, not what I want it to be. If you spend your life on a moral hill-top, you see nothing but the mud below. If, like me, you live in the mud itself, you get a damned good view of clear blue sky and clean green hills above. There's none so evil-minded as those with a moral mission, and none so pure in heart as the depraved. All the same, it was probably stupid of me not to have seen what she had been driving at.

'If there has been a mistake, Mr Wallace,' she was saying, 'I assure you I am very sorry, but you must see that it is my duty to establish the facts in cases like these. The parents are ... ?'

343

Stephen Fry

'When I tell you/ I said, 'you will understand why I am worried about any police involvement and subse­quent publicity. The boy's parents . . .' I paused dramat­ically '. . . are Michael and Anne Logan/

Her mouth dropped open.

I nodded heavily 'Precisely/

'Do you know, Mr Wallace/ she said, 'I thought David looked familiar from the first. I've met him. Lady Anne and I serve on the same bench/

'Is that right?' Big bloody surprise. I could picture her sentencing poachers and flashers to death with relish. 'Well, it so happens that there is a young girl staying at Swafford at the moment, Clara Clifford. She is the daughter of Max Clifford, whom perhaps you also know?'

'I know of him of course ... I didn't know he had a daughter.'

'She's fourteen. Now, to cut a long story short, I was walking in the woods at Swafford this afternoon and I heard a scream. When I got there I discovered that youth­ful eagerness and inexperience had brought Davey to the pass you have witnessed. Unfortunate and embarrassing, but hardly a matter for the police.'

She gave me another long look.

And you really are David's godfather?'

I raised my right hand. 'Poet's honour.'

She smiled and for the first time I saw the ghost of something attractive and even erotic lying behind her skeweringly blue eyes.

344

The Hippopotamus

If you like/ I offered, 'you can take an impression of my bite-mark. Isn't that usual forensic practice?'

'I think what I'll do/ she said, rising to her feet, 'is go and have another word with David. Would you mind staying here for a moment?'

'No, no. I can read your letters.'

'Nothing very interesting there,' she said with a laugh. 'You will find an ashtray in the middle drawer however.'

I composed a little present for her in the notepad.

There's a beautiful doctor called Fraser

With a glance like a surgical laser;

If you're guilty of sin

She'll stare at your chin

And save you the price of a razor

Underneath I wrote, 'Limericks are the best I can come up with these days. I'm only sorry there are no good rhymes for “Margaret” . . . with love, Ted Wallace.'

Under that thick ice, I thought, lay the perfectly preserved remains of a passionate heart. I believed I knew exactly the kind of sounds she would make at the moment of orgasm. Something between a creaking gate and a pouncing jaguar. Humby-ho. I would never get a chance to prove myself right.

Davey stood a little sheepishly by the reception desk while she took charge of his paperwork. A thoughtful nurse, or perhaps Dr Margaret herself, had given him a handful of glossy magazines to hold in front of his groin.

345

Stephen Fry

Behind them protruded a thick white bandage.

Tve used sutures/ she told me. They will dissolve in one or two days/

'No permanent damage?'

'He'll find it a little painful to pass water for a while and even more painful to . . .'

'Quite.'

'Otherwise he'll be fine. I'm sure he's a good healer.'

'You speak truer than you know/ I said, to a thun­derous look from David.

'I've also given him a tetanus booster and some antibi­otics.'

'And he can redress the bandage himself after each piddle, can he?'

'Oh, he'll have no trouble, will you, Davey?' she said, laying a hand on his shoulder.

'I'll be okay,' he mumbled, writhing like a pint of live bait at the embarrassment of being talked about over his head as though he were a five-year-old.

The journey out of Norwich passed in silence. I was too pre-occupied with avoiding bollards and lorries to talk and David had his own thoughts to contend with. Once we had cleared the city boundary and settled ourselves behind a pleasantly slow-moving van, I felt relaxed enough to speak.

'Fortunately,' I said, 'that doctor is a friend of your mother's.'

'She said. Will she tell Mummy anything?'

'No,' I said. 'I don't think so.'

346

The Hippopotamus

'I might/ said Davey, greatly to my surprise.

'Well, if you think that would be a good idea.'

He shifted uncomfortably in his seat. 'She has to know what Simon did. It was wicked. It was evil.'

'Now, hang on.' I took my eyes off the road for a second to look at him. 'What would you expect Simon to do? I mean he comes upon a scene like that . . .'

'He knew. He knew perfectly well what was happen­ing. He knew and he was jealous. He wanted to humil­iate me and destroy me. He's always been jealous, you see. He's like the brother in the parable of the Prodigal Son. He can't bear being ordinary and he can't bear Mummy and Daddy thinking I'm different and special.'

'And that's what you are, is it? Different and special?' It still stuck in my craw to repeat that ghastly word.

'You know I am, Ted.'

'At the risk of sounding obvious, isn't everyone?'

'Well, that's true as well. I don't actually believe that what I do is anything so extraordinary. I think anyone could have my power if they really wanted it.'

'Even me?'

'Especially you] You've already had that power, when you were a poet. You wrote “Where the River Ends”, didn't you?'

'I've always thought my power as a poet came from studying form and metre and, of course, the poems of others, not from tapping some mystical source. And,' I thought it was about time to give it to him straight, 'I hate to disappoint you, but “Where the River Ends” is

347

Stephen Fry

not about the purity of nature and its contamination by man/

'Yes, it is. It's about pollution.'

'It's about the fact that the poetry of Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Gregory Corso was included on the school syllabus.'

'What?' He stared at me as if I had gone mad.

'Poems are inspired by real things, real shitty, concrete things. I was making a bitter joke about how the pure well-springs of poesy were being fouled by people I thought of as inadequate and talentless nobodies. I delib­erately used the tired old metaphor of rivers running to the sea just to satisfy my desire to describe those poor harmless American poets as floating turds.'

'Well,' said Davey, shifting again, 'I don't see what difference that makes. Your poem still has my meaning, doesn't it? The river starts as pure and then, as it goes through each town and through the city and to the sea, it becomes darker and dirtier and more disgusting. Your poem still says that. I don't suppose anyone who reads it knows about those poets. It is about purity.'

'Yes, but the point is you can't start a poem by want­ing to write about some capital-letter idea like Purity or Love or Beauty. A poem is made of real words and real things. You start with the base physical world and your own base physical self. If some meaning or beauty comes out of it, then that is, I suppose, the wonder and relief of art. You want gold, you have to go down a mine to hack it out of the ground, you have to sweat your guts

348

The Hippopotamus

out in a filthy forge to smelt it: it doesn't fall in gleam­ing sheets from the bar of heaven. You want poetry, first you have to muck in with humanity, you have to fight with paper and pencil for weeks and weeks until your head bleeds: verses aren't channelled into your head by angels or muses or sprites of nature. No, I don't see that my “gift”, such as it ever was, has anything in common with yours at all, Davey'

David chewed on this for a while. 'So what exactly are you saying?'

'I don't know, my old darling. That's the bugger of it. I don't know.'

A car behind me honked its horn and I noticed that I had slowed down to under thirty miles an hour. It occurred to me that with clever gadgetry you could easily chart the emotional state of a driver from his variations in speed and aggression at the wheel. I considered the idea of cars having sensors installed which would pick up driving inconsistencies and calculate their cause by reference to some electronic table compiled by a compe­tent psychologist. The data selected from this table would then send signals to a display on the roof. 'Attention! The driver of this car has just had a terrible row with his wife.' 'This driver is besotted with his new mistress.' 'This driver is in a foul bate after being unable to find his spec­tacles this morning.' 'This driver is in an even, equable temper.' I was convinced, as that retired police commis­sioner used to say, that it would constitute a major contri­bution to road safety. The only flaw, I supposed, lay in

349

Stephen Fry

the possibility that experienced drivers were more adept than me at driving consistently whatever their mood.

We caught up with the van ahead and I shook myself from this pointless reverie. This is the worst of driv­ing, your thoughts get sucked into long tunnels, as into a sleep. You don't, as it were, breast the waves of thought, you are borne along by them and you end up drifting.

I glanced across at Davey. He was slumped in his seat in that slack-jawed, eye-glazed lolling stupor at which adolescents excel.

'Perhaps it would help/ I said, 'if you told me more about the exact nature of your powers. I think I have a goodish idea, but you can fill in the gaps/

All right/

By the time the hedgerows had leapt up by the road­side and the gables of the hall were flashing behind the parkland trees, I believed myself to be more or less, as Max Clifford would say, 'up to speed', Lilac and all.

I dropped Davey off at the back of the house before restabling the car. He was to slip upstairs, unseen if he could help it, while I explained to the household that the poor angelic mite was all fagged out after a hard day's mending bumblebee wings, healing bruised butter­cups, smiling sweetly at the raindrops and generally being David. Once he was safely between the sheets he could be visited without anyone being the wiser as to the local details of his injuries.

Simon was waiting for me in the garage yard. I stopped

350

The Hippopotamus

the car and pulled myself out, leaving the engine running.

'It's nearly seven/ he remarked, a hint of complaint in his voice. I had arranged in my note to him that we should RV here at half past five.

'Never mind about that/ I said. 'You manoeuvre this bastard thing into its hangar. My driving days are over/

His enthusiasm for cars got the better of his grumpi-ness. He climbed in, nosed the Mercedes into the garage and switched off the motor. I stood in the yard waiting for him to come out. The rain had stopped and every­thing shone and dripped, fresh as a washed salad.

Simon remained in the gloom of the garage for an inexcusably long time.

'What are you doing in there?' I shouted into the dark­ness. 'Singing the bloody thing to sleep?'

He emerged two or three minutes later, edged round the car and closed the double doors of the garage.

'There was blood on the front passenger seat,' he said. 'I wiped it off.'

'Ah. Good man. Now, if it's seven, I had better go to my room and change.'

We walked back towards the house.

'I got your note, Uncle Ted. I haven't told a soul. I wouldn't of anyway.'

'Wouldn't have/ I muttered.

'Oh, sorry. I never get that right.'

'Well don't apologise for it, for God's sake.'

Simon had a quality that seemed to bring out the mental bully in me. All bullies become more and more

351

Stephen Fry

irritated by their victim's acquiescence in being bullied, which inclines one to bully all the more.

Are you cross with me?' Simon asked.

'I am excessively annoyed with myself, as it happens/ I said. Annoyed with myself for being irritable with you, annoyed with you for allowing me to be irritable with you, annoyed with myself for allowing myself to be annoyed, and most of all annoyed with myself for being stupid.'

There were too many 'annoyeds' and 'irritables' in that sentence for Simon to be able to decipher its meaning, so he changed the subject.

Is Davey all right?'

'He'll live. I banished him to his bedroom. And what of Clara?'

'She'll be okay. I sent her to bed too.' He bent down to pull up a weed from under the cotoneaster that grew along the wall around the side of the house. 'I suppose Davey is furious with me?'

'He thinks you're jealous of his powers. He thinks you deliberately chose your moment to crash through the woods and humiliate him. He thinks you are evil.'

Simon gaped. 'That's pathetic'

'Well, perhaps. And what's your point of view? What do you think of Davey?'

He thought about this.

'He's my brother.'

'Yes, yes. But what do you think of him? What's it like to have him for a brother?'

352

The Hippopotamus

'I can't really remember not having him as a brother. He can be a pain. I mean, let's face it, he is a bit weird. And he really pisses me off with all that bloody anti-blood-sports stuff. I mean, he claims to love nature so much; but surely he can see that we wouldn't have all these copses and spinneys if it weren't for the pheasants. Everything would be flat fields for thousands of square miles. The woodland doesn't just support game-birds, you know. There's wild flowers and wild mammals and insects that completely depend on shooting.'

'Of course, of course, of course.' I wasn't in the mood for a lecture on killing. Tm talking about the other side of Davey'

'Look, here's Max,' said Simon and I received the impression that he was relieved to be spared the neces­sity of answering.

Max was standing outside the front door in a dark suit, looking up at the sky with benevolent approval, as if it were a junior management executive who had successfully cut back on their workforce without provok­ing a strike.

'Ted. Simon. Splendid,' he said as we approached. 'Rain's stopped. Glorious evening.'

'More on the way, actually,' said Simon.

'You seem very cheerful, Max,' I remarked.

'And you look like shit, old boy' Which, I suppose, I did. My skin and scalp were scratched by brambles and my clothes were devastated by rain, sweat and mud.

'I'll go in now,' Simon said. 'See you at dinner.'

353

Stephen Fry

Max took my arm and walked me to the lawn. As a matter of fact, Tedward, I am cheerful/

'Really?' I said, frigidly. I hated it when Max used Michael's name for me.

1 might as well tell you, if you hadn't already guessed, that I asked Davey to see what he could do about Clara.'

'Has she been ill?'

'Oh, come off it, Tedward, you know perfectly well what I'm talking about. Anyway, David did see her. Always found the boy an intolerable little prick, if you must know. Hated having to ask him a favour. So goody-goody. Nothing in this world less bearable than an anti-business snob. He'll spend his father's nasty money when the time comes, right enough, don't you worry. But, well ... I can't deny his ability. I don't know what he did. It must have been very intense. Clara's absolutely knocked out by it.'

And it's worked?' I stared at him. It had never crossed my mind that, after Simon's intervention, David's cure might actually have been effective. Aside from anything else, in crude physical terms, she had not appeared from my angle so much to have swallowed her medicine as to have spewed it down her front.

'I've just spent half an hour with her in her room.'

'You mean her teeth are straight and her eyes look in the same direction?'

'Well, no. Obviously he can't alter her appearance just like that. But inside, Tedward! I've never seen her so cheerful and so . . . confident. It's absolutely miraculous.

354

The Hippopotamus

WeVe sent that girl to psychiatrists and nuns and summer camps and God knows what. It's unbelievable.'

I agreed and nodded enthusiastically while he gibbered on.

'She wouldn't tell me how he did it, but I wouldn't care if he fed her eye of newt and ear of bat. The squint will correct itself soon, apparently and the teeth too. And she's just so much . . . oh, you'll see. You'll see.'

'Fabulous/ I said. 'Bloody marvellous. But look, I must bath and change if I'm not going to be late for dinner. See you at the bin.'

Oliver was gliding up the stairs as I made the hallway.

'Well!' he said, turning at the sound of the front door. 'Another happy meeting of the Somme Re-enactment Society I see.'

'Yes, most amusing. I got caught in the storm, if you must know.'

'I think the storm got caught in you, dear.'

I headed up the stairs towards him. 'By the way' I said, 'has Jane been asking after me?'

'No, heart. There was a message to say she can't come till tomorrow.'

'Why not?'

'More tests. Doris Doctor just refuses to believe. They probably want to exhibit her at the Royal College of Surgeons. Shall we bustle? We mustn't be late for din-dins.'

I wallowed in my bath, gazing at the sky and clouds painted on the ceiling, a tumbler of the ten-year-old

355

Stephen Fry

clutched in my fist. I wished I could wash myself clean of everything. I wished Jane were here. I wished I was back in London. I wished I wasn't so old, so confused and so cross. At least there was whisky. A bottle, that's all I asked for, a full bottle of . . .

As I peered through the mist of steam at the angels looking down on me from their trompe-l'ceil heaven, a small thought arose somewhere in my mind like a bubble of marsh gas. I dropped my whisky glass in surprise. Other thoughts began to pop to the surface, each light­ing the other in a lightning path like will o' the wisp. Could it be possible, I wondered? Did these sudden zig­zags of light lead anywhere, or was the parallel of ignis fatuus appropriate and the whole burst of thoughts noth­ing more than a false trail into the swamp? Hum . . .

I reached out an arm for the telephone handily placed in an alcove by the bath.

356

9

Podmore's felt hammer gonged the conversation to an end. I replaced the receiver and hauled myself from the tub. Years ago I discovered, and you may find this useful, a trick which enables one to dress quickly after a bath. The problem with clothing oneself when not fully dry is that one's shirt and especially one's socks will frot and rub frictively against the skin. They won't slide easily on: a man can pull a shoulder muscle or crick a neck trying to wrestle with clothes in a damp post-balneal state. My discovery is that the use of a good old-fashioned bath-oil will solve this problem. It leaves the skin smooth and sleek as a seal's and sir's shirtings and half-hosements will practically leap from the floor and wrap themselves around him in a gladsome twinkling.

I was therefore able to glide serenely into my under-linen and stand before the mirror, patting my well-rounded tummy while I considered the little errands that had to be completed before dinner. Just two essential visits would . . .

I was distracted by the sound of moans and gasps float­ing through the wall from the Fuseli Room next door, where Oliver was billeted. I finished dressing, brushed my hair and came out into the corridor. Oliver emerged at the

357

Stephen Fry

same time. He looked guiltily towards the door of his room.

Ted, you double beast. Were you listening just now?'

'Listening? To what?'

Tm afraid Mother was enjoying a quick one off the wrist. Fm a noisy lover when it comes to myself.'

'My dear old Oliver/ I said. 'When my life is so impov­erished that I find I have nothing better to do than listen to an old man wanking, I will put a bullet in my head/

I had been listening, however. A man does. I parted from Oliver at the top of the stairs.

'Just have to pop back and check something/ I said. 'Think I left a packet of Rothies in my room.'

I hurried back along the corridor and towards the passage­way where the children slept. Having paid my respects to Clara, a fruitful conversation, I slipped down the stairs and out of the front door. I skimmed across the drive, panting like a dog on a hot day, crossed the front lawn, skirted the west drive and achieved the park from the side. After all, I didn't want to scramble up and down that bloody ha-ha again. The sky was thickening to charcoal as new storm clouds gathered, but the light, although mucky for a July evening, was perfectly good enough to see by. I picked my way carefully through isolated heaps of horse dung, confi­dent that Tubby would have stabled the horses against the bad weather and that I would escape rape or trampling from a loose stallion. I found what I was looking for and bent down to get a closer look. Satisfied, I straightened myself with a grunt and returned to the house.

Only Max, Mary, Michael and Oliver were in the small

358

The Hippopotamus

drawing room when I arrived. Michael and Mary were sitting on a sofa in the corner, talking quietly while Oliver presided over the drinks tray.

Max was peering out of the window. It gave out in the direction of the Villa Rotunda and the lake beyond, so I knew he couldn't have seen me crossing the front lawn.

'Simon was right/ he told the room. 'More storms on the way.'

Ar, these country folk, they ben know/ Oliver croaked.

That is the worst Norfolk accent I have ever heard/ I said.

Then you haven't heard real Norfolk people talking, dear. Their accents are much less convincing than mine, I can assure you. Pour you a whisky?'

'Larger the better,' I said.

I approached the sofa where Michael and Mary sat.

'But Michael, everyone should know,' she was saying.

'Mary, believe me, I'm delighted. Delighted. Let's leave it at that.'

'But Michael, don't you feel that you have a duty? I mean this gift is something remarkable, something that must be used.'

I hovered behind the sofa, not wanting to interrupt.

'I don't know, Mary. I just don't know. You see Annie doesn't like . . .'

'What doesn't Annie like?' said the woman herself from the doorway. Acutest bloody hearing you could think of.

359

Stephen Fry

There was a fractional pause - too short for a court of law to read anything into, but long enough to embar­rass Michael - before Oliver came to the rescue.

'Voddie dear, that's what you don't like. You're a gin girl. Voddie makes you grumpy. So I'm pouring you a full Jilly Gill of lovely Jenny Gin.'

Thank you, Oliver.'

I caught Anne's eye, which was filled with a pleading expression that I found hard to interpret. She gestured to the far corner of the room, away from the others. I joined her there and we pretended to inspect an Oakshett acrylic portrait of the Logan family.

Tve just seen Davey,' she said in a low voice. 'What's wrong with him?'

Ah,' I said. 'Bit knocked up, that's all. You might as well know that he ... he had a session with Clara this afternoon.'

'Oh, no . . .'

They got caught in the rain. Both fine. Just a bit tired. As a matter of fact, Max believes Clara is wonderfully improved.'

'She is?' Annie shook her head sorrowfully. 'Davey said something about a row with Simon, but he wouldn't tell me any more. What happened?'

'You might as well face it, Anne. No point fighting. That boy is a miracle worker. There can be no question about it. Don't you agree?'

She started to speak.

'Don't you agree?' I repeated slowly.

360

The Hippopotamus

She looked at me and caught her breath.

'Oh, Ted1.' she whispered. 'Oh, Ted, you wonderful man!' She tugged at my sleeve like a child. 'I knew I could rely on you. I knew itV

'Rely on Ted?' Oliver's voice burst in on us. 'I find that hard to believe,' he said and presented Annie with her gin.

'Ted has been an angel and promised to take the twins ballooning at Brockdish tomorrow,' said Annie brightly. 'So sweet of him.'

'Balloonists at Brockdish? They sew up the end of a pair of Ted's drawers and then fill them with hot air, do they?'

'No, Oliver,' I said. 'They take a life-sized nylon replica of your ego and ask you to talk into it on any subject. That's how it's done.'

'Wit isn't quite your thing, my love,' said Oliver. 'Just a little too cumbersome, you see.'

Rebecca, Patricia and Simon were the last to arrive, Patricia giving me a secret little grin as she came in. She's been considering my offer, I thought. How delightful.

II

'There should have been twelve of us to dinner tonight,' Annie announced as we filed into the dining room. 'But Jane hasn't come yet and Davey and Clara are having early nights. So we'll have to have Max, Oliver, Mary

361

Stephen Fry

and Simon on that side and Rebecca, Ted and Patricia on this.'

It's dark enough to be winter,' said Michael, closing the shutters.

'Cosy,' said Oliver.

'Gloomy,' said I.

The first course was a smoked goose-breast, and things were going well conversationally until Patricia asked whether Lilac was still healthy.

'She's fine,' said Simon. 'Perfectly all right.'

"The most wonderful thing,' Patricia said. 'I mean, that vet was so absolutely sure, wasn't he? Ragwort poisoning. I looked it up in the library. It's a chronic condition that causes irreversible liver damage. How can Lilac be all right?'

Simon mumbled something about vets being as capa­ble of making mistakes as anyone else.

'We must face facts, Anne,' said Mary. 'I know you don't like talking about it, but something has got to be said, hasn't it? Apart from anything else, Max and I are just so grateful to Davey'

Simon cut into a slice of goose-breast with a violent scrape of his plate.

'I'm very glad that you are happy,' Anne said. And I'm very glad Clara is happy'

And Oliver,' said Max. 'Oliver's happy, too.'

'Oh, yes/ said Oliver. 'I'm happy. I can eat disgusting food again and voddie up without fear.'

And I'm happy,' said Rebecca. 'Happy about my daughter.'

362

The Hippopotamus

And you must be happy too, Anne, Michael? You must be happy about Edward/ said Patricia.

'And Simon must be happy about Lilac/ said Mary.

Simon nodded uncomfortably.

It's so silly not to talk about it!1 Mary went on, her eyes shining. As if it's a guilty secret, instead of a wonder­ful, wonderful miracle that has made everyone happy/

I laid down my knife and fork with a clatter. Now. It might as well be now.

'Well, Fm sorry to piss on this parade/ I said. 'But Fm not fucking happy. Fm not fucking happy at all. In fact Fm as miserable as bloody sin.'

'Of course you are, you miserable old shit/ snapped Oliver. And you deserve to be, too. Christ almighty, what a piece of work you are.'

'Hold it, hold it!1 Michael thumped his hand down on the table. 'What is going on here? This is a dinner table. PleaseF

'Fm sorry, Michael. You're the host and whatever you say goes, but I think Edward Pissing Wallace has it coming to him.'

'Hear, hear,' said Rebecca on my left.

Oliver pointed a spoon at me. 'You still don't believe in Davey's power, do you, Ted?'

I looked across at Anne and shrugged my shoulders. 'If you must have it, then I'll tell you. No, I don't believe in Davey's powers.'

'You seel He just can't take it.' Oliver's voice was rising in pitch. 'He is granted this one chance, as we all

363

Stephen Fry

have been here, a chance which most people would never be permitted in a thousand lifetimes, he's granted this one chance to pull himself up by his boot-straps, this one chance to lever himself out of the swamp he's been stuck in for all these years, this one chance to raise his eyes upwards and see the beauty of things, and what's his reaction? “I'm not fucking happy. I'm miser­able as bloody sin.” Of course he's not happy. What we've experienced this last week is nothing less than a divine revelation. A divine fucking revelation and we can all see it, all of us can see it and celebrate it. We've got at least that little inch of humility that allows us to shout and weep with unreserved joy. All of us but bloody-minded, pig-headed, stone-blind, stone-deaf, Doubting Ted.'

There were tears in his eyes. I looked down at my plate in embarrassment.

Tm sorry,' Oliver said. I'm sorry, Ted. But the fact is, I love you, you stupid turd. You're a friend that I love. We all love you. But you're such a . . . such a . . .'

'It's all right, Oliver,' said Rebecca, 'we all know what he is. It's just this, darling/ she said, turning to me, 'why won't you accept what you can see? Why would it hurt you so much just to face the truth?'

'What truth?' I asked.

'The truth,' said Oliver, 'that there is such a thing as the Operation of Grace.'

'The truth/ said Rebecca, 'that there really is some­thing out there.'

364

The Hippopotamus

Tm not interested in what's out there/ I said. Tm interested in what's in here.' I thumped my chest.

'ChristV Oliver banged down his fork. 'Why do you have to say things like that? Why do you have to say things like that? This isn't a fucking sixth-form debate. There are no prizes for smart-arsed remarks here.'

1 must say/ said Max, 'it's a bit odd that a poet of all people should be the only one unconvinced by all this. What's happened to your sense of mystery your imagi­nation?'

'No/ I said, 'it's not odd at all. If I was interested in mysteries and the imagination, I would have become a physicist. I'm a poet because I'm very mundane. I'm only good with what I can taste and see and hear and smell and touch.'

'Oh here we fucking go again, Pamela Fucking Paradox . . .'

'It's not a paradox at all, Oliver.'

'So is that why you came here, then? Just to pour cold water all over us? Just to sneer up your snotty sleeve? If you can't take it seriously, why try and ruin our happi­ness?'

'Of course I take it seriously. I take it very seriously indeed. Jane is my god-daughter and Davey is my godson. Whether you believe it or not I am very serious about that. Very serious indeed.'

'Well then, why . . .' Rebecca began, but was inter­rupted by Anne.

'I'm pressing the bell for Podmore,' she said. 'I would

365

Stephen Fry

rather we didn't say anything while he is in the room/

We sat in stiff and strained silence while Podmore cleared away the plates and served up the main course. I drank down two big glasses of wine. I was hot and uncomfortable. Oliver, opposite me, alternately glared and shook his head in sympathy. I had been touched when he had said he loved me.

Michael was revolving the stem of his wineglass and frowning. He threw little puzzled glances at me from time to time. Simon was scarlet and deeply uncomfort­able. Max, Mary, Rebecca and Patricia had formed a strong bond and twittered loudly about the weather and poli­tics. Every silly assertion seemed deliberately aimed in my direction, as if daring me to challenge their united front. It was like being sent to Coventry at school.

At last Podmore departed.

'Seconds away/ said Oliver. 'Round Two/

'Tedward,' Michael said, sawing at a roast potato. 'I don't understand. You are denying everything? Everything that I told you?*

'It's not a question of denying, Michael. I don't deny anything you said about your father, I don't deny anything you . . .'

'Woah, woahV said Oliver. 'Just a Molly Moment. Michael's father?'

I looked towards Michael, who shrugged and nodded his assent. I told the story of Albert Bienenstock and his horses and Benko, his batman. Not news to Rebecca or Anne, obvi­ously, but everyone else, even Simon, was amazed.

366

The Hippopotamus

'Well, you see!' said Patricia, nudging me. 'It's inher­ited. Skipping a generation. The whole thing's inherited.'

'Oh, I don't doubt that,' I said. 'I'm sure of it, in fact.'

'Well what do you doubt, for God's sake?' demanded Oliver, thoroughly exasperated.

'Look,' I said, 'you might as well all know the reason I came here. I was asked.'

'Asked?'

'By Jane. I bumped into her in London a couple of weeks ago. She told me . . . well, she didn't tell me very much in fact. She told me that her leukaemia had gone and that there had been some kind of miracle at Swafford last month while she had been staying here. That's all she told me. She wanted me to find out the rest for myself

'Which you have.'

'Which I have.'

'So what's the problem?' asked Michael.

'There's no problem,' I said. 'No problem at all.'

'But Davey?' said Oliver. 'What do you think about Davey?'

'Do you really want to know?'

'YesV Oliver screeched.

'Steady on, Oliver,' said Michael.

I could well appreciate the note of hysteria in Oliver's voice. I tried to sound as neutral and dispassionate as possible. I really had no idea how anyone would react to what I had to say.

'I think that Davey . . .'

367

Stephen Fry

The door opened.

'What is it, Podmore?' Annie asked in a tone of voice that, for her, was distinctly sharp.

'I beg your pardon, Lady Anne. There is a telephone call for Lord Logan in his study.'

The annoyance around the table was colossal. I was relieved. The diversion gave me a few minutes to collect my thoughts and arrange what I had to say in some kind of coherent order. If I'd had a piece of paper and a pencil I would probably have jotted down headings. Anal old Ted.

Michael stood up. 'Damn,' he said. Tm sorry. If it has come through on my study line it must be America and it must be urgent. I shall be as quick as I can. Please hang on for me, Ted. I want to hear everything that you've got to say.'

We passed a fraught three minutes in silence. I drank another glass of wine, to looks of recrimination from everyone.

Michael returned and closed the door behind him.

Tm sorry about that/ he said, resuming his seat. Ted, go on, please/

'What was I saying?'

'Oh, Lord save us, he's drunk now,' said Oliver. 'You were going, Teddy bear, to give us the benefit of your expert opinion of Davey.'

'That's right,' I said. 'Well, I think the key is this. David is a sensitive boy and a proud boy'

Max laughed and the others joined in. Oliver snorted his contempt.

368

The Hippopotamus

That's it, is it? “David is a sensitive boy and a proud boy.” End of analysis. I think you've said enough, dear. If anybody is proud and sensitive, it's Edward Wallace. Too proud and sensitive to believe what conflicts with his lumpish theories or to admit it when even he can see that he's wrong.'

'Leave it, Oliver1.' said Michael in a tone fierce enough to make everyone jump. 'I want to hear what Ted has to say. Now more than ever I have to hear it. You'll find out why. For the time being, just be quiet.'

I stared at him in some puzzlement. He looked back at me with an expression of great intensity and -1 believe I recognised it even then - of great fear. With the bene­fit of hindsight, it must certainly have been fear. At the time I couldn't understand the look at all.

'Well,' I said, slowly, 'as I say, David is proud and sensi­tive. He loves poetry and he loves what he thinks of as Nature with a capital “N”. He is not quite as intelligent as he would like to be, but then which of us is? He is not unintelligent, you understand, he is intelligent enough to glimpse valuable and serious ideas and to be maddened that they are beyond his reach. Because so much that he prizes is out of his intellectual grasp he imagines he can leap at the truth of things by intuition or with the help of some deeper agency, some spirit of nature. He cannot believe that God could have granted him the sensitivity to respond to beauty and ideas without also giving him the mental equipment or artistic talent to participate actively in them. I don't think any of this is

369

Stephen Fry

uncommon with a fifteen-year-old. It would be bizarre and horribly inappropriate if David was in fact as intel­ligent and precocious as he wanted to be. The intellect grows, like any other part of the mind or body. Davey is different from most children, however, because he is so extraordinarily sensitive. Some sensitive children just suffer in silence. But David is extraordinarily proud as well as extraordinarily sensitive. He hates his inadequacy. He cannot bear it. It has driven him to a miserable and dangerous hysteria. Some proud and sensitive children in similar situations fantasise that their parents are millionaires. Davey's father already is, so that would hardly be feasible. Some fantasise that they are foundlings, or aliens, or special agents, or capable of unsupported flight, or invisible, or possessed of supernatural powers. And that is what David has chosen. Supernatural powers. It wouldn't usually matter, because under normal circum­stances everyone around such a child would tease or straight-talk its delusions away. But you have all fed them, which is absurd and irresponsible and, I believe, immensely dangerous. Davey's hysteria has grown and grown and overtaken the entire household.'

I took a giant swig from my glass of claret.

It was Oliver, naturally, who broke the silence. He stared at me with disbelief. 'How can you sit there and say all that? We know what we have seen.'

'No you don't,' I said. 'You haven't the faintest idea what you've seen. Believe me when I say this. David is possessed of no extraordinary powers whatsoever. There

370

The Hippopotamus

is nothing miraculous he has done or can do. He is a very very very ordinary child with a more than ordinary helping of, as I said, pride and sensitivity . . .'

There was a noise outside the door and we all straight­ened into silence again.

The door did not move.

'Come in1.' shouted Michael.

Still no response. With a click of irritation, Michael strode to the door and opened it. The corridor was empty. Michael looked down it to right and left.

'Oh dear/ said Anne, 'do you think Podmore has been listening?'

'Probably just the wind,' said Michael, closing the door and returning to the table. 'There's another storm on the way'

It was true that wind had begun to howl around the windows and down the flues.

'Carry on, Ted,' said Oliver, with a savage growl. 'I think you were saying that we are all very irresponsible and absured and that Davey is a very, very, very ordinary child.'

'A very ordinary child who needs a great deal of kind­ness and understanding if he is not to slide into hyster­ical chaos,' I said.

'But you're a mass of contradictions,' said Max. 'You've just admitted that Michael's father's powers could have been inherited and now you say that there aren't any powers.'

'I have said no such thing.'

371

Stephen Fry

'He is drunk/ said Patricia. If anyone needs kindness and understanding, it's you, Ted.'

1 need my share, certainly/ I said.

'We can all play armchair psychiatrists, can't we, Ted?' said Rebecca. 'We could, for instance, examine the mind of the ageing poet.'

'Quite,' said Oliver, 'the man who believes that spir­ituality is his province and his alone. The man who thinks that a glimpse of art and the infinite is only granted to hairy-arsed curmudgeons who drink hard liquor and understand Ezra Pound. The man who struggles so hard for his own poetry that he has developed a theory that denies the possibility of inspiration in others. 'If I have to flounder in the mud sweating and straining, then it must be true that everyone else on earth has to as well.' That's your grand “philosophy”, isn't it? The sight of an innocent child given grace as a divine free gift just chokes you to death, doesn't it?'

'You may think I appear very graceless,' I said. 'But you must . . .'

'Graceless, darling? Why ever should we think that? Your own inspiration dried up years ago and you've lived on rotten credit ever since. As an ugly old fraud your­self, anything of any beauty or authenticity has to be mocked and rejected. Graceless? Lordy Lord, no.'

'Let's leave character out of it for the moment,' said Max, with boardroom crispness, 'and concentrate on facts. Do you deny, Ted, that Edward's life was saved?'

4No/ I said. 'I have to confess that I cannot deny that.'

372

The Hippopotamus

And Lilac?' said Oliver. And Jane? And me? And Clara? Can you deny us? Look at what's in front of your great fat nose, man!'

'All right, Oliver, calm down,' said Michael. 'Let's get this straight, Ted. Are you saying that my son has absolutely no powers whatsoever?'

'Nol' I cried. 'No, I am not saying that! I think he is a remarkable and wonderful boy. I think he is, in his own way, a miracle. Not magical, but uncommon enough to be a miracle in this world. I think he has powers that are as rare as they are beautiful.'

'I'm going mad!' said Patricia clutching her hair. 'You said a moment ago, “David is possessed of no extra­ordinary powers whatsoever. He is a very, very, very ordinary child.” Your exact words. And half a minute later . . .'

'I stand by every word I have spoken,' I said.

There was an almost unanimous shout of rage at this perversity. It was brought to a shocked silence by Anne.

'Oh be quiet, all of you!' she stormed. 'You just don't see, do you? You just don't see! You told Ted that he couldn't see the truth when it was right under his nose, but it's not Ted, it's you. It's all of you. Ted is absolutely right. Everything he has said is absolutely right and consis­tent and you just can't see it.'

'Annie! My love, I don't understand!' Michael stared across at his wife in bewilderment.

'I'm sorry, Michael,' I said. 'I've been playing games with you.'

373

Stephen Fry

'Games? You've been playing games?'

'Well, not games precisely. Just getting a bit of my own back perhaps. Allowing you to misunderstand. You asked me whether or not I thought your son had any powers whatsoever and I said that he did. I said that he was a remarkable and wonderful boy. What you don't understand, what only Annie understands, is that I wasn't talking about Davey!

Still he couldn't see. None of them could see.

'Not talking about Davey?'

'No,' I said. 'I was talking about Simon!

'What?' Oliver whipped round on Simon, who sat there, fork hovering in front of his face, and mouth open in consternation and alarm.

'Oh look . . .' he said. 'Come on, Uncle Ted ... I mean . . .'

Tm sorry, Simon,' I said, 'but the truth must be told.'

Anne leant forward and placed a hand on Simon's arm.

'Ted! Annie! Explain . . . please, tell me what's going on,' said Michael.

'You saw yourself how it all began two years ago, Michael/ I said. 'For the time being we'll call it the first miracle. You came into the room when Edward was lying suffocated and almost unconscious from asthma. Simon did what any sane human being would do. He pumped the boy's arms back and forth and tried to get the breath­ing started. He pummelled the ribs. A few seconds later, sentimental hysterical David elbows him out of the way,

374

The Hippopotamus

frightened by such violence and completely ignorant of the need for it. He has just laid a hand on his chest when you and Annie walk in, at the very moment that the results of Simon's commendable first-aid became appar­ent and Edward is starting to cough and splutter. You see the hand laid on the chest and you instantly think of your father, who despite his own obvious good sense was very nearly bamboozled himself into thinking that he had done something extraordinary with his batman's sore foot. Some time later you tell Davey this story and the stupid boy who had probably only laid his hand on the chest to feel for the boy's heart-beat or something equally useless, believes he has inherited a mystical power from his grandfather.'

'But . . . you can rationalise anything like that,' said Patricia. There was a hint of doubt in her voice, however.

'Rationalising a sunset doesn't make it any less beauti­ful,' I said. 'Nor is it designed to. Simon is thoughtful, practical, unsentimental and kind. He is also entirely with­out ego. It never occurred to him to take credit or demand thanks for what he did. Davey on the other hand . . . well, just think about it. Just consider the sequel. Michael and Annie decided that Davey's miraculous healing of Edward should remain a secret. Michael because he didn't want his son to be hounded or feared in the way Albert had been, Annie because she could see what Michael believed and how much it delighted his sense of sepa­rate family pride. She was also afraid that Michael might think she was in some way jealous of Davey's apparent

375

Stephen Fry

gifts. Which, of course, is precisely what you did think, isn't it, Michael?'

Michael nodded.

'And the point is this. In spite of the pact of secrecy and silence, word of Davey's powers did get out. How? I'll tell you. Davey made damn sure word got out, that's how. I had it in a letter from Jane recently. “When Davey first told me how he had healed Edward,” she wrote. It wasn't part of Davey's plan that his magical gifts should go unrecognised. Jane told Patricia and Rebecca, they told Max and Mary and Oliver. Davey announced his status as healer and miracle worker to the whole bloody world.'

'I think I'll go now, if I may, please,' Simon said, half-rising from the table. He had been listening to all this with acute dismay and unease.

'No, Simon ... I beg of you,' Michael said. 'I beg you, stay.'

Simon dropped reluctantly back into his seat. Everyone was looking at him and he hated it.

'So you are saying that it is really Simon who has done all this healing?' said Patricia. 'He is the one who inher­ited his grandfather's gifts?'

'Certainly Simon has inherited Albert Bienenstock's powers,' I said.

'Simon. A healer . . .' said Michael shaking his head.

Simon himself sat there, simply squirming with embar­rassment, poor lad.

'Michael, can't you see what I've been saying?' I said.

376

The Hippopotamus

Tour grandfather wasn't a healer. His powers were the powers of calm good nature, amiability decency self­lessness, courage, modesty and sense. Prosaic you may think, but what is poetry if not the compression of the prosaic? Such qualities as Albert Bienenstock possessed may have seemed as dull as coal, but taken all together, concentrated in one man, they refined themselves into a diamond. That is what Simon has inherited. Isn't that enough for you?'

It was not enough for them.

'I'm sorry to go on about this,' said Patricia, 'but you're avoiding the obvious point, Ted. What about Jane and Lilac and Oliver and Clara?'

'Exactly,' said Oliver. 'If modesty and calm good nature can cure leukaemia and liver failure then I think the world should know about it, don't you?'

I poured myself another glass of wine. The stuff was going down me by the gallon and swishing in my belly. The wine, together with the unaccountable nervousness I was feeling and the adrenaline that was pumping around me, was starting to cause my guts to bubble and squelch with wind.

'Davey really believed that he could cure sickness,' I said, suppressing a wet fart. 'I think we can be sure of that. He concocted some weird fantasy about having to be pure in order to channel his mysterious power.'

'Pure?' asked Michael.

This was going to be extremely difficult.

'I suspect he had discovered somehow, perhaps with

377

Stephen Fry

wounded animals, that he could not always effect a cure with a laying-on of hands. He developed a bizarre theory. Pure and natural were the keywords. What he meant by them, God knows. Nothing more coherent or convinc­ing than what an advertising copy-writer means by them, I suppose. Davey decided that he had to be as pure and natural as an animal. Pure and natural as a ladybird, of course, not pure and natural as the ladybird's cousin, the dung-beetle. Pure and natural as a gazelle, not pure and natural as the hyenas that bite into the gazelle's eyeballs and feast on its intestines. His ideas of purity and natural­ness seem to have more in common with a Victorian hymn-book for children than any real understanding of the physical world. All things bright and beautiful and no things dark and foul. But at the same time Davey was undergoing puberty, don't forget, an event not covered by Victorian hymnbooks, an event as dark and foul as you could imagine. Davey happens to be a voraciously sensual child. Those of us around the table who are male can remember what our gonads and gametes were up to when we were fifteen, I'm sure. In my case they're still up to it, but without the up-springing violence of old. Davey was mortified to discover one morning that he had succumbed to a wet-dream. This presented him with a problem. Why had God and Nature packed his body with this nasty fluid? How could he remain a pure, pretty little buttercup while such a squirting horror dwelt within him? He reconciled it this way. Semen was a life-giving spirit, he knew that much. So long as he avoided the

378

The Hippopotamus

lustful outflow of this spirit, it would remain pure, would in fact be the purest, most potent essence imaginable. He decided that his semen ... I hope you're ready for this, Annie . . . was the ideal channel for his healing. When his cousin Jane arrived for her stay at Swafford he was presented with the ideal test-case for this belief. He persuaded Jane that the laying-on of hands would not be enough and that he needed to impregnate her with his spirit. It's a technique many a leader of religious cults has found invaluable. In Davey's case, desire and appetite were submerged and I am sure he sincerely believed that his only motivation was to heal and to help.'

'Oh, Davey . . .' Annie whispered. She had been completely unaware of this feature of her son's mission and mission and I felt a bit of a pig letting her know so publicly.

'I'm sorry to have to tell you that it is highly proba­ble he tried the same trick with Lilac,' I added.

Jaws hit plates and Oliver started to throw mental daggers at me.

'Only Oliver can tell you,' I said, feeling he deserved it, 'what technique was employed in his case.'

Heads swung towards him. Poor Oliver, not a good dissembler.

'Look,' he said, licking his lips. 'We all believed, didn't we? Some of us still do. Everything Ted has said has been bigoted and circumstantial. He hasn't disproved a thing.'

'You seduced my son?' said Michael.

379

Stephen Fry

'No, bugger it, he seduced me! He told me . . . Jesus, it sounds absurd if put like that . . . Look, if you have to have it described in language that Wallace would understand, then yes, Davey fucked me up the arse. And I'm better, aren't I? It was Davey, though. Simon hasn't done a thing for me. I've barely spoken to the oaf all week. It's Davey! Of course it's Davey. Why the hell are you listening to this fat sod? What about Jane and Lilac?'

Mary and Max exchanged horrified glances. They were thinking about Clara, poor dears.

'I can explain about Lilac,' I said. I'm afraid the whole episode was entirely my fault.'

'Your fault?' Michael frowned.

'Yes, it's the stupidest thing on earth. I telephoned the vet, Nigel Ogden, this evening. I asked him to confirm that Lilac really had been suffering from ragwort poison­ing. He said it was the only condition that could explain the depression, the bleeding from the mouth, the aimless circling, the leaning against the wall, the abdominal pain, the loss of appetite, the diarrhoea, the raging thirst, everything. But I had had an inspiration in my bath this evening, you see. Like Archimedes. I may not be a vet, but no one could deny that I am a drunkard. What if, I asked the vet, what if Lilac had been drunk? Really, really soused. Off her saddle and pissed out of her mane. Nigel thought about it for a bit and had to confess that he had never seen a horse drunk, but that he supposed the symptoms might be similar to those he witnessed. It

380

The Hippopotamus

would affect a horse badly, he imagined, since it is very difficult for them to vomit. It wouldn't explain the bleed­ing from the mouth, however. But I had an answer to that, too. I won't go into the reasons, but early in the morning on the second day of my stay here I dropped a full bottle of ten-year-old malt whisky into a bucket in the west park, where Lilac and her fellow four-footers have since been grazing.'

'You did whatT gasped Patricia.

'Yes, I know it sounds mad, but it seemed the right thing to do at the time. We can go into it later. The point is, this evening in the bath, the moment I remembered that incident, things clicked into place. I crept out before dinner to inspect this bucket. The bottle had cracked open and whisky had oozed out. There were blood marks on the cracked glass. Lilac, with irreproachable taste, must have discovered this unexpected treasure while out in the park the day before yesterday and licked and sucked and lapped at it happily for most of the afternoon. Barley can never have been presented to her in so pleasurable a form. She didn't get all of it, you'll be pleased to know, just enough to give her a good time and a really vicious hangover. It truly is as simple as that.'

They all stared at me in silence. Then Simon began to laugh.

'Drunk!' he said. 'So Lilac was drunk. Do you know I thought it couldn't be ragwort! Alec and I spent a whole day checking the field, because it does grow round here. You have to check, you know. It's no good using a weed-

381

Stephen Fry

killer, because funnily enough they just make the plant more palatable to horses. Drunk!'

Oliver banged the table. 'All right!' he said, face whitened in anger. "That might be true. Might be. But . . .'

'Clara,' interrupted Max heavily. 'What about Clara? Are you saying that boy dared to . . .'

I thought I would have to tread carefully here.

'You will be pleased to know that Davey did not attempt to do to Clara what he had done to Jane and Oliver and Lilac. He tried this afternoon to feed her some stuff to do with his spirit . . .' I thought that was near enough the truth to be acceptable, they could take the phrase as literally or metaphorically as they chose. 'But Simon prevented him. What you thought you were doing sending that poor girl to Davey I have no idea.'

'We wanted to do what was best,' said Mary help­lessly. 'It seemed the right thing.'

'Look, far be it from me to lecture you both,' I said, 'but Clara is the most downtrodden young thing I have ever seen in my life. You make it abundantly plain to everyone that you are ashamed of her, you tick her off in public for her awkwardness, which naturally makes it ten times as bad, and you give her, it seems to me, absolutely no indication whatsoever that you love her or enjoy her company'

'How dare you?' Max shouted across the table. 'How bloody dare you?'

'Oh be quiet, Max, he's right and you know it,' said Mary. 'Of course he's right. Clara doesn't match up to

382

The Hippopotamus

your idea of the perfect accessory and it maddens you/

Max thought about answering back, but the idea of a public row clearly didn't square with his self-image, so he shrugged his shoulders and relapsed into silence.

'Simon has worked a miracle on Clara this last week/ I said. 'He's had her helping in the stables, feeding the chicks, walking the puppies, swimming in the lake. He's given her confidence and he's shown her that he likes her for herself

'No, really, I haven't done anything . . .' Simon started to say.

'She was very shaken by her experience with David this afternoon,' I went on. 'She told me about it when I visited her in her bedroom just before dinner.'

'My, we have been busy this evening, haven't we?' said Oliver. 'Quite the . . .'

'What do you mean “her experience” exactly?' Mary interrupted.

'Well, as I say, Davey can be very intense in his manner. She was a little frightened by it all. As well as demeaned, I should imagine. You've sent her to doctors and shrinks and specialist summer-camps and religious retreats as though she were sicker and madder than a rabid dog. Now you instruct her to go into the woods with Davey to be healed like a leper. Simon happened to see them together and took Clara away. He told her that there was absolutely nothing wrong with her. He told her that he adored her exactly the way she was and that if she dared change a thing about herself he would never forgive her.

383

Stephen Fry

She worships Simon of course and for the first time in her life she felt loved, simply and properly loved. I think, as far as she is concerned, that is a miracle.'

Mary looked across at Simon.

'Look . . .' he said. Big tears had started to roll down his face. 'Don't be . . . don't be angry with Davey. He never meant any harm. He was just trying to help. He's not bad or anything. He's just a bit confused, really.'

Annie stroked his arm.

Oliver was trembling now. 'What is the matter with everyone?' he cried. 'You haven't explained the most important fact of all. Jane. You can't, can you?'

I raised my shoulders apologetically. 'Remissions occur, Oliver,' I said.

'Remissions occur! Loaves of bread will sometimes turn into fishes. Dead men will sometimes walk. Pigs have been known to fly. Balls to “remissions occur”.'

'I can tell you all about Jane,' said Michael in a voice so heavy that we all turned to him. 'Bex, I'm very sorry. That telephone call just now. Jane has died. At the hospi­tal. In her sleep. I had to wait until I had heard what Ted was going to say.'

I stared into my wineglass. I suppose somewhere in the back of my mind I had guessed that there was some­thing wrong. When I thought of the over-bright phrases that ended her last letter to me. 'Smile! We are loved. We are loved. Everything is going to be wonderful. Everything shines. Everything is as it could only be and must be.' Silly child.

384

The Hippopotamus

'Let's go through/ said Anne. 'I don't think we want anything more to eat.'

We rose from the table in silence and processed to the drawing room. Michael comforted Rebecca who sobbed into his shoulder and I put an arm around Patricia.

I felt curiously to blame, as though my breaking of Davey's spell had been the cause of Jane's death and the sudden misery in the household. We sat in a ring of sofas surrounding the large central ottoman, which we all gazed at glumly to spare us the hardship of meet­ing one another's eyes. With the wind whipping around the house and the rain batting the window panes, our huddled group resembled frightened cavemen staring into a fire.

'She had a relapse this morning/ Michael said at last. 'She thought it must be a mistake. Kept telling the doctors that she was fine and that she had to travel to Norfolk. She died at ten minutes to eight this evening.'

Ten to eight. Exactly the moment the memory of the whisky bottle in the bucket popped into my head. Oh, be quiet, Ted, I said to myself. Get a grip, man.

'And all the time,' said Michael. 'All the time, she thought she was well. Never said goodbye because she thought she was cured.'

'But meV said Oliver, unable to suppress it for any longer. 'What about me? I'm cured, aren't I?'

'Oh, Oliver,' I said. 'Did you really throw those pills away?'

385

Stephen Fry

'I don't need them. I don't need any fucking pills. Can't you understand that?'

Then why were you shouting in agony in your bedroom this evening?'

'I wasn't shouting in agony, I was . . .'

Poor old bugger.

'I was groaning'm agony/ he said at last, with an attempt at dignity. There's a big difference.'

'I'll send someone out to Norwich to get some more pills/ said Michael.

It's only angina/ Oliver said. 'If I stick enough vodka down me to deaden the pain, it can wait till morning.'

Annie slipped out of the room and Oliver looked up at me with reddened eyes.

'Why, Ted? Why did you have to spoil it all? It could have been true. Why couldn't you let it be true?'

'Oh, Oliver, I don't know. You're the priest, not me. Isn't it something to do with letting man get on with things on his own?'

'But it was such a beautiful idea. It gave us hope.'

'Don't imagine,' I said, 'that just because you can't be cured by the laying-on of hands or the injection of holy semen that life and the world are therefore hopeless. If you want to talk about the Operation of Grace, why not talk about Simon?'

'Oh, please . . .' Simon stood up. 'Uncle Ted, I'd much rather you stopped talking about me like that. Please.'

I waved a hand at him.

'I'm sorry, old darling. It's been very fraught for you.

386

The Hippopotamus

The more one ages, you will find, the less afraid of senti­mental language one becomes. Didn't mean to embar­rass you/

'I have to walk Soda now/ he said backing out of the room.

'Good idea/

He stopped in the doorway.

'Urn, Aunt Rebecca. I'm very sorry about Jane. You have my . . . you know. Deepest . . .'

He turned to go but his path was blocked by Annie.

'Simon!' she said with alarm. 'Davey isn't in his room.'

Ill

Mary Clifford's first thought was for her daughter.

'What about Clara?' she wailed.

Fatuous woman. As though Davey might have kidnapped her or eloped to Gretna Green with the help­less creature lashed to his saddlebow and struggling to be free. I doubted he wanted to see her or her big buck teeth ever again in his life.

'Clara is in bed, fast asleep,' said Annie.

'Tedward,' said Michael. 'That noise we heard outside the dining-room door . . .'

The same unwelcome thought had crossed my mind. If David had been listening to my pompous and pitiless analysis of his disordered psyche, then the Lord alone knew how he would react. Such a clumsy arse I am, such a hopelessly clumsy arse.

387

Stephen Fry

'Oh hell/ I said. 'He can't have gone out on a night like this. He can't have done. Not in his condition.'

'Condition?' Annie grabbed my arm. 'What do you mean condition?'

'Look, there's no time to explain,' I said. 'Davey injured himself this afternoon. He's perfectly all right, but he should be in bed.'

'Dad, why don't you and Mum and Mary and Rebecca and Patricia search the house?' said Simon. 'I'll get Soda and the rest of us can take a look outside.'

Simon took Max and me through to the boot room where he issued us with Wellington boots, waxed jack­ets and torches.

Armed with these, we trooped down into the kitchens and out of the back door, past the astonished kitchen staff. I, as back marker, was the member of the party detained by Podmore.

'Is anything wrong, Mr Wallace?'

'Everything's fine, my old. We're going on a treasure hunt. Such fun.'

Out in the kitchen yard Simon shouted to us above the roar of the wind and the hissing of the rain.

'We'll go first to the kennels. Get Soda.'

Max and I nodded and followed him round the back of the house. Rainwater streamed down the back of my neck.

'Do you really think he might have run away?' Max asked me.

'No idea,' I answered. 'Christ, I hope not. But if he

388

The Hippopotamus

was listening at the door while I was talking about him, he might well feel unable to face us all.'

'And how exactly is he injured?'

'Well/ I said. 'Your daughter bit him/

Max nodded. 'I see/ he said. 'Yes, I see. The stupid thing is, I never liked the little shit anyway. Always relieved that Simon was my godson, not him. Should have gone on instinct.'

'Not a little shit,' I said, fumbling for the hood of my Barbour. 'Hardly his fault everyone encouraged him to believe he was Jesus Christ, is it?'

We had arrived at the kennels. Soda lived apart from the beagles, who were baying and whimpering in the sheltered part of their accommodation. Max and I talked to them and told them that thunderstorms were a harm­less lark, while Simon let Soda out and attached a long lead to her collar.

'She's got a super nose,' he said. 'Davey and I used to play hide and seek with her. Manhunts and that kind of thing. You know.'

He bent down and spoke to Soda in the rushed, excited tones humans reserve for dogs. 'Seek Davey, Soda! Go on, girl. Seek Davey! Seek Davey! Where's he gone, Soda? Where's he gone?'

Soda jumped and barked with pleasure. Never occurred to her to wonder what the fuck we were doing playing games like this late at night in the middle of a thunder­storm. Still, I suppose if you're a dog and are used to watching humans zooming around at high speed in metal

389

Stephen Fry

boxes, staring at large sheets of paper at breakfast-time and breathing in smoke from short white tubes, then noth­ing the species does has the power to surprise you.

We followed Simon and Soda out of the kennel yard and round the side of the house. Soda's nose bounced along the ground, snorting and sniffing. Every now and again she would dance off in a wide loop, following some false scent, before returning to the main path.

'Nothing yet/ said Simon.

I looked up at the windows of the house and watched the lights being switched on in rooms on every floor. The indoor search party seemed to be having no luck either. I wondered whether they would have the courage to ask the servants for help.

We arrived at the front door and immediately Soda began to snuffle around the steps, barking excitedly and spinning about in frenzied circles.

'I think she's got something/ said Simon. 'Go on, girl! Find Davey! Find DaveyV

Soda yapped twice and tore off towards the front lawn, Simon holding on to the lead. Max sprinted after them, anxious to show he could keep pace with a spaniel and a seventeen-year-old. I rolled along at a more leisurely jog and caught up with the trio at the end of the lawn. Max and Simon's torches were flash­ing back and forth, but it was light enough to see that of David there was absolutely no sign. Perhaps he had climbed over the ha-ha and into the park. That is where I had been earlier in the evening, peering at the

390

The Hippopotamus

bucket of whisky. The association gave me an idea.

'False alarm/ said Simon.

Soda was barking and circling furiously in the dirch of the ha-ha.

'Wait a moment/ I panted. 'I was here the other week. It was morning.'

'So?' said Max.

'Well, I followed a trail of foot-prints in the dew across the lawn and this is exactly where they ended. I couldn't understand it. That's the morning I went on into the park and dropped that whisky bottle. Thought I'd been going mad. Just a trail of foot-prints up to here and then nothing.'

Simon looked at the lawn and then down into the ditch where Soda still leapt frantically back and forth barking fit to bust. He slid down the ha-ha and shouted at Soda.

'Seek Davey! Go on, girl! Find him, find Davey!'

Soda kept up a stream of excitable yapping and began to scrabble with her paws against the bank. Simon watched for a moment and then took hold of Soda's collar and pulled her back.

'Look!' he shouted, pointing. 'Here!'

We were still on the lawn level, so Max lay on his stomach and looked down, tracing with the light of his torch a line in the turf that Simon was indicating, a line which formed three sides of a large square.

Simon grasped a handful of the grass and heaved. A heavy turf rectangle, about three feet by three, started to come away from the bank. It was uncut at the top

391

Stephen Fry

edge, which formed a kind of hinge, but Simon wrenched until the whole piece worked free. Max and I, reaching down, helped take the weight of it and drop it into the ditch beside Simon.

As soon as the entrance was revealed, Soda tried to jump in, but Simon kept hold of her.

'Leave, Soda. Leave. Good girl, you're a good girl. Stay there.'

He shone his torch into the hole.

Max and I, lying on the grass above and peering down, could make out the doorway of a tunnel cut into the bank beneath us and see in the light of Simon's torch two bare feet in the mud.

'Is he all right?' I shouted down. 'How is he?'

Simon put his hands around the ankles and began to pull. 'I can't tell,' he said. 'I'll need a hand.'

Max and I dropped into the ditch to help. Max pointed with the torch as Simon and I heaved and more and more of Davey emerged. He had been lying lengthways and unclothed in a tunnel scarcely big enough to contain him. Air-holes, if he had bothered to construct any, would have been penetrated by the rainwater and blocked by wet earth. He cannot have lain there for more than an hour, I thought. None the less, the air would have become appallingly fetid and the soil would have dampened into mud.

I heard footsteps and shouts from the direction of the house. Michael and Annie were running up the lawn, with Rebecca, Patricia and Mary not far beyond.

'You've found him,' cried Annie. 'Where was he?'

392

The Hippopotamus

They looked down into the ha-ha, where Simon and I were laying David's body in the ditch. Soda licked the mud from his arm and moaned like a rusty gate.

'What's that bandage/ asked Michael. There's blood on it! What in God's name has he tried to do to himself?'

'Don't worry about that/ I said.

'He's not breathing!' wailed Annie. 'Michael, his eyes are closed and he's not breathing.'

Simon took one of David's arms, which were lying by his side, and I took the other. We raised them, pulling them back behind Davey's head. We did this several times, slowly at first and then with a quicker and quicker rhythm. Then Simon laid the palms of his hands on David's chest and bore down with all his weight, push­ing and pushing. Annie began to cry.

Finally Simon, shaking his head, pinched his brother's nose with one hand and with the other opened his mouth. He leant down and blew into the lungs.

IV

'Look, for fuck's sake, keep up, the pair of you,' I growled. 'I'm ten minutes late as it is.'

'We'll run then,' said Roman. 'Yes sir, we'll bloody run.' Abso-sodding-lutely. We'll only bloody run.' They barged past me and ran up the pavement, turn­ing left and out of sight into Great Marlborough Street. By the time I caught up three minutes later they were swinging around a lamp-post outside the back of Marks

393

Stephen Fry

and Spencer's and tutting at imaginary wrist-watches as I approached.

Til be over there/ I said. 'In that building. I shan't be more than half an hour.'

There's a McDonald's in Oxford Street/ said Davey.

'Yeah, can we go over and get a Big Mac?'

Ten Big Macs.'

'Come on, Dad! It's the last week before school.'

'Yes, yes, yes. Don't badger me. Here . . .' I handed them each a fiver. 'And don't throw up in the street.'

'We'll see you in there. It's just in Oxford Street.'

'See you . . .'

I crossed the street and pressed the buzzer.

Ted Wallace to see Lionel Greene.'

'Second floor.'

Greene didn't have a great deal to say. Nothing that Michael, as executor, hadn't already told me.

The estate consists in its entirety of the South Kensington property, four hundred thousand pounds in shares and one hundred and thirty thousand pounds on deposit with the Chelsea branch of Coutts Bank.'

'Seems rather a lot.'

'Would you prefer the shares to be sold?'

'Not sure.' If I donated it all to some leukaemia soci­ety I would end up regretting it. Gestures are all very well but they don't fill bellies. Besides, it would look so smug and greasy.

'It's entirely up to you as the sole beneficiary.'

'Yes. I know.'

394

The Hippopotamus

And the house, Mr Wallace? Will you be selling that?* Tm certainly not going to live there/ I said. 'You should see the wallpaper/

'I am also instructed to give you this letter/ Greene added, handing me an envelope. The handwriting was appalling and it took me some time to make out a single one of the words. Greene turned discreetly away to allow me to read it unobserved.

Dear Ted,

Fm so sorry. I can't understand what has gone wrong. I need you to send Davey to me at the hospi­tal. Fm suddenly very weak. It doesn't make sense. It doesn't make any sense at all.

The doctors say it is the leukaemia, but we know that can't be the case, don't we? We know that they must have made a mistake.

Thank you for all your letters and for throwing yourself into the work so whole-heartedly. I wasn't wrong in sending you and I haven't forgotten that we have a bargain. I have made a new will which the nurses have witnessed. Spend the money on bringing Davey's gifts to the notice of the world.

As soon as you get this, come with Davey. He will make it all right again.

Love

Jane

395

Stephen Fry

'I understand/ Greene said, 'that she died no more than half an hour after writing it. Very sad. I had a brother who died of leukaemia. Terrible thing.'

'Very terrible/ I said, standing.

'Just two things before you go, Mr Wallace. I have the keys to Onslow Terrace here. Would you like them?'

'I suppose so. There are some papers there that I ought to go through.'

I pondered the strange custom by which people's letters, bills and scraps of useless rubbish instantly become dignified with the word 'papers' the moment they are dead. Objects like house-keys, of course, become 'effects'.

Greene handed them over with a ceremonial dip of the head.

'And the second thing?' I asked.

'The second thing is this,' he said, picking up a book from his desk with a shy smile. 'I wonder if you would do me the inestimable favour of signing my copy of your Collected Works?'

The boys were sitting in an upstairs section of the 'restaurant', as it liked to call itself.

'Everything hunky-dory, Dad?'

'Yes, thank you,' I said. 'My God, do you really enjoy those things?'

'No, Dad,' said Roman, 'we eat them because we hate them. Of course we bloody enjoy them. Have one your­self

'I think not.'

'Go on, Ted,' Davey urged. 'You've got to at least try

396

The Hippopotamus

them, you know. Otherwise youVe no right to criticise them/

'Oh, now hang on . . .'

I'll nip down and buy you one/ he said.

'Why couldn't he have asked a waitress?' I asked, watching him shoot downstairs.

'Come off it, Dad,' said Roman. 'Don't pretend to be more ignorant than you are.'

'Hum.'

'Do you know, Davey had never had a Big Mac in his entire life until two weeks ago?'

'Yes, I did know,' I said.

'Bloody addicted to them now.'

'Roman,' I said.

Tup?'

'I know we never really get much of a chance to talk about anything, but I just wanted to say . . .'

'Say what?' he burped.

'Well, I just wanted to say that it's bloody good having you around. I hadn't realised what a . . . what a splen­did chap you are.'

He smiled. 'Dad, you've been watching too many bloody American TV movies,' he said.

'I have watched as many American TV movies as I've eaten Large Macs,' I replied. At least let me try and be fatherly, however badly I may do it. The thing is this, though. I know Helen only carts you off to London when she and Brian go on their August holiday, but if ever you want to hang around the flat at any other time, well . . .'

397

Stephen Fry

'Yeah, I don't mind/ he said.

'Good man/

'So, what's the plan for the rest of the afternoon?'

'Well, it's a rather busy day for me, as it happens. I've got to cut over to the Harpo Club in half an hour. Your sister Leonora wants to see me. I think her boyfriend's run out on her.'

Again?'

'Again. She hasn't got anywhere to live. I might be able to put a house her way. After that, I've got a meet­ing with a publisher.'

'You writing poems again?'

'This is for a novel, based on . . . based on an idea that came to me last month when I was staying at Swafford/

'And how long will that take?'

'I've no idea. I've never written one before.'

'No, the meeting. With the publisher person. How long will that take?'

'Oh, no more than half an hour I don't suppose. But then I really ought to zip over to visit Oliver in hospi­tal.'

'Blimey, and what are we supposed to do all this time?'

Ah, well. I'm coming to that. Let me see . . . hold out your hand.' I took out my wallet. 'I reckon thirty pounds each ought to do it.'

'Yes pleasel' said Roman. 'Ought to do what?'

'This afternoon's task,' I said, counting out six ten-pound notes into his hand, 'is for the two of you to go

398

The Hippopotamus

along Brewer Street and see if you can get admitted into a dirty movie or bed show. You have to bring me the ticket stubs as proof/

'And what's the prize if we manage it?*

The prize, Roman, you ungrateful bastard, is the pleas­ure of having seen a dirty movie or a bed show. Isn't that enough?'

'All right. You're on.'

'Fine.'

'What exactly is the point, though?' Roman asked, pocketing the cash. 'Is it just to annoy Mum if she ever finds out?'

'It has absolutely nothing to do with your mother. Nothing whatsoever. It's for the good of your immortal souls, if you must know.'

'Fair enough. Just wondered.'

'And the pair of you had better find something to do this evening as well. I'm taking Patricia out to Le Caprice and she may want to come back afterwards.'

'We're going to need more than thirty quid, then.'

'You are one of the few people,' I said, handing him another four tenners, 'who can accurately be called a son of a bitch.'

'Your Big Mac, sir,' said Davey, depositing a plastic tray on the table in front of me. 'With Regular Fries and a Diet Coke.'

'There's no cutlery,' I protested.

'Fingers and thumbs are nature's cutlery,' he replied with a self-conscious smile.

399

Stephen Fry

I opened the brown polystyrene box and stared gloomily at the contents.

'Do I really have to do this thing?'

'Yes, sir, you do!' they said.

A good trick/ Davey offered, 'is to empty the fries into the open lid of the box. There, like that. Neat, isn't it?'

I raised the bun to my face and sniffed. 'What's that pink sauce?'

'Ah, nobody knows. It's the best-kept secret in the world.'

I bit into the warm squashy mess.

They watched me anxiously, like laboratory techni­cians monitoring a guinea-pig.

'Well, Dad? What do you reckon?'

Absolutely disgusting.'

'So, another one?' Davey suggested.

'Why not?' I said.

400

Buy Arrow

Order further Stephen Fry titles from your

local bookshop, or have them delivered direct

to your door by Bookpost

□

The Liar

0099457059

£6.99

□

Making History

0099457067

£6.99

□

The Stars' Tennis Balls

0099471558

£6.99

D

Paperweight

0099457024

£6.99

□

Moab Is My Washpot

0099457040

£6.99

FREE POST AND PACKING

Overseas customers allow £2 per hardback

PHONE: 01624 677237

POST: Random House Books

c/o Bookpost, PO Box 29, Douglas

Isle of Man, IM99 1BQ

FAX: 01624 670923

EMAIL: bookshop@enterprise.net

Cheques and credit cards accepted

Prices and availability subject to change without notice Allow 28 days for delivery

www.randomhouse.co.uk




Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




MOAB IS MY WASHPOT An Autobiography Stephen Fry

For You The Book of D., Verse 10, Chapter 11 ISBN-13: 978-1569472026 © 1998 Stephen Fry All Rights Reserved This edition published by Soho Press, 2003

To live is to war with trolls in heart and soul. To write is to sit in judgement on oneself. Henrik Ibsen The interests of a writer and the interests of his readers are never the same and if, on occasion, they happen to coincide, this is a lucky accident. W. H. Auden

This page left intentionally blank

MOAB IS MY WASHPOT

This Page Left Intentionally Blank

8 Joining In ‘Look Marguerite... England!’ Closing lines of The Scarlet Pimpernel, 1934 1 FOR SOME REASON I recall it as just me and Bunce. No one else in the compartment at all. Just me, eight years and a month old, and this inexpressibly small dab of misery who told me in one hot, husky breath that his name was Samuelanthonyfarlowebunce. I remember why we were alone now. My mother had dropped us off early at Paddington Station. My second term. The train to Stroud had a whole carriage reserved for us. Usually by the time my mother, brother and I had arrived on the platform there would have been a great bobbing of boaters dipping careless farewells into a sea of entirely unacceptable maternal hats. Amongst the first to arrive this time, my brother had found a compartment where an older boy already sat amongst his opened tuck-box, ready to show off his pencil cases and conker skewers while I had moved respectfully forward to leave them to it. I was still only a term old after all. Besides, I wasn’t entirely sure what a conker skewer might be. The next compartment contained what appeared to be a tiny trembling woodland creature. My brother and I had leaned from our respective windows to send the mother cheerfully on her way. We tended to be cruelly kind at these moments, taking as careless and casual a leave of her as possible and making a great show of how little it mattered that we were leaving home for such great stretches of time. Some part of us must have known inside that it was harder for her than it was for us. She would be returning to a baby and a husband who worked so hard that she hardly saw him and to all the nightmares of uncertainty, doubt and guilt which plague a parent, while we would be amongst our own. I think it was a tacitly agreed strategy to arrive early so that all this could be got over with without too many others milling around. The loudness and hattedness of Other Parents were not conducive to the particular Fry tokens of love: tiny exertions of pressure on the hands and tight little nods of the head that stood for affection and deep, unspoken understanding. A slightly forced smile and bitten underlip aside, Mummy always left the platform outwardly resolute, which was all that mattered. All that taken care of, I slid down in my seat and examined the damp shivering thing opposite. He had chosen a window seat with its back to the engine as if perhaps he wanted to be facing homewards and not towards the ghastly unknown destination. ‘You must be a new boy,’ I said. A brave nod and a great spreading of scarlet in downy, hamstery cheeks. ‘My name’s Fry,’ I added. ‘That’s my bro talking next door.’

9 A sudden starburst of panic in the fluffy little chick’s brown eyes, as if terrified that I was going to invite my bro in. He probably had no idea what a bro was. The previous term I hadn’t known either. ‘Roger, Roger!’ I had cried, running up to my brother in morning break. ‘Have you had a letter from —‘You call me bro here. Bro. Understood?’ I explained everything to the broken little creature in front of me. ‘A bro is a brother, that’s all. He’s Fry, R. M. And I’m Fry, S. J. See?’ The hamster-chick-squirrel-downy-woodland thing nodded to show that it saw. It swallowed a couple of times as if trying to find the right amount of air to allow it to speak without sobbing. ‘I was a new boy last term,’ I said, a huge and perfectly inexplicable surge of satisfaction filling me all the way from gartered woollen socks ‘to blue-banded boater. ‘It really isn’t so bad, you know. Though I expect you feel a bit scared and a bit homesick.’ It didn’t quite dare look at me but nodded again and ‘gazed miserably down at shiny black Cambridge shoes which seemed to me to be as small as a baby’s booties. ‘Everybody cries. You mustn’t feel bad about it.’ It was at this point that it announced itself to be Samuelanthonyfarlowebunce, and to its friends Sam, but never Sammy. ‘I shall have to call you Bunce,’ I told him. ‘And you will call me Fry. You’ll call me Fry S. J. if my bro is about, so there won’t be any mix up. Not Fry Minor or Fry the Younger, I don’t like that. Here, I’ve got a spare hankie. Why don’t you blow your nose? There’ll be others along in a minute.’ ‘Others?’ He looked up from emptying himself into my hankie like a baby deer hearing a twig snap by a water pool and cast his eyes about him in panic. ‘Just other train boys. There are usually about twenty of us. You see that piece of paper stuck to the window? “Reserved for Stouts Hill School” it says. We’ve got this whole carriage to ourselves. Four compartments.' ‘What happens when we get.., when we get there?’ ‘What do you mean?’ ‘When we get to the station.’ ‘Oh, there’ll be a bus to meet us. Don’t worry, I’ll make sure you aren’t lost. How old are you?’ ‘I’m seven and a half.’ He looked much younger. Nappy age, he looked. ‘Don’t worry,’ I said again. ‘I’ll look after you. Everything will be fine.’ I’ll look after you. The pleasure of saying those words, the warm wet sea of pleasure. Quite extraordinary. A little pet all to myself. ‘We’ll be friends,’ I said. ‘It won’t be nearly as bad as you expect. You’ll see. Kindly paternal thoughts hummed in my mind as I tried to imagine every worry that might be churning him up. All I had to do was remember my own dreads of the term before. ‘Everyone’s very nice really. Matron unpacks for you, but you’ve got to take your games clothes down to the bag room yourself, so you’ll have to know your school number so as you can find the right peg. My number’s one-o-four which is the highest number in the school’s history, but twelve boys left last term and there are only eight or nine new

10 boys, so there probably won’t ever be a one-o-five. I’m an Otter, someone’ll probably tell you what House you’re in. You should watch out for Hampton, he gives Chinese burns and dead legs. If Mr Kemp is on duty he gives bacon slicers. It’s soccer this term, my bro says. I hate soccer but its conkers as well which is supposed to be really good fun. My bro says everyone goes crazy at conker time. Conkers bonkers, my bro says.’ Bunce closed up the snotty mess in the middle of my hankie and tried to smile. ‘In two weeks’ time,’ I said, remembering something my mother had told me, ‘you’ll be bouncing about like a terrier and you won’t even be able to remember being a bit nervous on the train.’ I looked out of the window and saw some boaters and female hats approaching. ‘Though in your case,’ I added, ‘you’ll be buncing about...’ A real smile and the sound of a small giggle. ‘Here we go,’ I said. ‘I can hear some boys coming. Tell you what, here’s my Ranger. Why don’t you be reading it when they come in, so you’ll look nice and busy.’ He took it gratefully. ‘You’re so kind,’ he said. ‘I’ve never met anyone as kind as you.’ ‘Nonsense,’ I replied, glowing like a hot coal. I heard the grand sounds of approaching seniors. ‘Okay then, Mum,’ someone said. ‘Don’t say “okay”, darling. And you will write this time, won’t you?’ ‘Okay, Mum.’ My bro and I never called our parents Mum and Dad. It was always Mummy and Daddy until years later when Mother and Father were officially sanctioned. Towards adulthood we allowed ourselves to use, with self-conscious mock-Pooterism, Ma and Pa. Last term, I had put my hand up in an art lesson and said, ‘Mummy, can I have another piece of charcoal?’ The form had howled with laughter. There again, during the first weeks of summer holidays I often called my mother ‘Sir’ or ‘Matron’. Bunce buried himself in the Trigan Empire, but I knew that he was listening to the sounds too and I could tell that the confidence and loudness of the other boys’ voices terrified him. He clutched the sides of the comic so hard that little rips appeared on the outer pages. On the way to Paddington after lunch I had felt more dread, infinitely more terror and despair at the prospect of school than I had the term before. During the long summer holiday Roger had told me to expect this. Homesickness was much worse the second and third terms than it was the first. Bunce had come as a godsend therefore, something to take my mind off my own fears. The door to our carriage slid open with a loud bang. ‘Oh God, it’s Fry’s Turkish Delight. And what the hell are you doing by the window?’ ‘Hello, Mason,’ I said. ‘Come on, shove over. Bunce started to rise like a courteous old commuter offering his seat to a heavily- packaged woman. ‘Would you like... ?‘ he began huskily. ‘No, I want Fry’s seat, if he hasn’t stunk it out yet.’ Well there it was. I felt my face flush scarlet as I got up mumbling something inaudible, and removed myself to the corner seat farthest from the window.

11 For five minutes I had enjoyed the sensation of someone looking up to and admiring me. Bunce had respected me. Believed in me. Trusted me. Now the little puppy would see that the rest of the school treated me as if I was no one. Just another tiresome squit. I sat in my new seat, trying to look unconcerned and stared down at my bare knees and the grazes and indentations of gravel still there from a bicycle fall. Only yesterday afternoon I had been riding along the lanes listening to skylarks high in the huge Norfolk skies and watching partridges tread stubble in the fields. Three weeks ago I had had my eighth birthday party and been taken to see The Great Race at the Gaumont in Norwich. Mason settled himself into his conquered seat and looked across at Bunce with great curiosity and an air of faint repugnance, as if Bunce might be of a breed he had never run into before and hoped never to encounter again. ‘You,’ said Mason, kicking across at him. ‘Have you got a name then?’ The reply came as something of a shock. ‘I have got a name,’ said Bunce, rising, ‘but it’s none of your bloody business.’ Mason looked stupefied. There was nothing in the least bad about him. In taking my seat and remarking on my smell he had meant no particular insult, he was merely exercising the natural privilege of seniority. Seniority is pay-back time. He had been treated like a worm when he was small, now it was his turn to treat those under him like worms. He was ten, for heaven’s sake. He was allowed to wear long trousers. At prep school, ten is to eight what forty is to twenty in adult life. ‘I’m going over there,’ said Bunce, pointing to the seat next to mine. ‘It smells better over there.’ He threw himself down beside me with a determined bounce on the springs and then ruined everything by bursting into tears. Mason was denied the chance of any response to this astonishing eruption by the entrance into the compartment of Kaloutsis and his parents. It was not at all done for Family to board the train, but Kaloutsis was Greek and his parents serenely above the finer points of English protocol. ‘Ah, and here’s a little one,’ cried Mrs Kaloutsis, swooping down on Bunce. ‘And no one looking after you?’ ‘Thank you,’ Bunce snivelled, ‘but Fry S. J. is looking after me very well indeed. Very well. Very well indeed. I had a smut in my eye and he lent me his handkerchief.’ Train boys were generally the sons of military or colonial parents, and had flown in to London Airport to be picked up by uncles, aunts or godparents who would take them on to Paddington. Most other boys at Stouts Hill were driven to school by their parents. The reserved compartments filled up over the next quarter-hour with deeply tanned boys returning from hot weeks in places like Northern Rhodesia, Nigeria, India, Aden, the West Indies and Ceylon. One boy, Robert Dale, whom I liked, sat opposite me and Bunce and told us about India. Dale’s father edited an English language newspaper in Bombay and Dale always shouted ‘Aiee!’ when he was in pain. It had amazed me greatly when I first heard him stubbing his toe against the foot of the bed in the dormitory, since I had never imagined that expressions of pain could vary. I had thought ‘Ouch!’ and ‘Ow!’ were the same all over the world. I had suffered a hot and bothered exchange in my first French lesson, for example, when I was told that the French for ‘Oh!’ was ‘Ah!’ ‘Then how do they say “Oh”, sir?’ ‘They say “Ah.”’

12 ‘Well then, how do they say “Ah”?’ ‘Don’t be stupid, Fry.’ I had sulked for the rest of the lesson. Dale took off his shoes and socks and leaned back. He had the most splendidly fine feet, with a perfect, even spread of toes. At the beginning of every autumn term boys like him who spent their school holidays in Africa, Asia or the West Indies would show off by running across gravel barefoot without any pain. By the end of the term, with winter set in, their feet would have lost their natural tough layers of callused skin and they would be just the same as the rest of us. A guard looked in and performed a brief headcount. He gazed into the middle distance and told us that the last boy who had rested his foot on a seat had been arrested by the police at Didcot and put in prison, where he still languished on a diet of bread and water. ‘Sounds better than school food,’ said Dale. The guard grunted at our giggles and left. Boaters were thrown on to luggage-racks, feet put up on seats and talk turned to soccer, what had been done in the hols, who was going to be made prefect and the whole Edwardian schoolboy novel nonsense. Mason seemed to have forgotten all about Bunce’s strange outburst and was delighting the boy opposite with underarm farts. After one of those squealing, juddering, stomach-dropping false starts with which trains so tactlessly articulate human emotion, we pulled ourselves out of the great shed of Paddington and steamed west. The Gloucestershire town of Stroud, sanctified by the memory and to the memory of Laurie Lee, produces —or used to produce — almost all the baize that Britain and her dominions ever thought to use. Baize for the doors into servants’ quarters, baize for billiards, snooker and pool, baize for card tables, baize for casinos, auction-rooms and baize to drape over the cages of songbirds to fool them into thinking it night. Some miles to the south of Stroud stands the Bury, a great green hill over whose shoulders one might believe the weavers of the Slad Valley once threw a huge bolt of their baize as a giant billboard to show off their product to the world. The small village of Uley snuggles itself into the thicker nap at the base of this fuzzy-felt hill and sleeps there contentedly, unaware of triple-thick shakes, pay-per-view Fight Nights, Lottery Winsday and driver’s side air bags. The village of Uley still believes in Gestemered parish magazines, dividend tea, sherbet dips, Heinz salad cream and half-timbered Morris vans. The village of Uley grows lobelias and alyssum on the front fringes of lawn that bank up to warm ham-stone cottages out of which rumble the deep tones of Long Wave wireless. The village pub of Uley radiates a warm vapour in which are mingled the vanilla richness of pipe tobacco and the malty hum of Usher’s Ales. The village church of Uley has its fragrance too, a compound of Esso Blue, Mansion furniture wax and hymn books in a state of permanently suspended decay. High on a mound half a mile away stands Stouts Hill School, a dashing castle of knapped flint, all turrets and arrow-slits and skirted by a dragon-fly flicking, carp- snapping, mallow-flaming lake. The lane from Stouts Hill to the village winds steeply down to the Dursley road. There is horse shit there, dropped in caramac-coloured lumps by warm-sided bay mares ridden by gymkhana-jolly girls who blush fiercely when they

13 meet your eye. There is horse shit there all right. In the village of Uley nought-percent-financed Daewoos lurk behind remotely controlled carport doors, satellite dishes glitter from the roofs, copal varnished slices of barked Do-It-All elmwood proclaim Mulberry Lodge, South Fork and El Adobe. A blackboard outside the village pub vibrates in three-coloured chalk with the promise of Happy Hour, pool, premium guest beers and big screen satellite TV. The smell of stale lager and Doritos leaks up the main street to the church, where laserprinted A4 pages flap announcements from the chancel wall promising car boot sales and outreach fellowship retreats in Wales. Lard-arsed fatties in Russell Athletic sweatshirts swap Sensual Love Guide CD-ROMs with their neighbours as their Nike-ticked kids line up burger cartons on the barbecue patio and zap them with turbo-boosted water guns. The girls smear blusher on their cheeks and poke their tongues out fiercely when they meet your eye. Stouts Hill the school has closed now, to be replaced by Stouts Hill the time-share holiday home. Well, maybe it’s not so bad. Somewhere between warm gloop and cold water is the tepid truth about the village of Uley, which gets on with life as charmingly as it can. There was a time when the very Mansion furniture wax, dividend tea and gymkhana girls of sentimental memory were themselves modern and noisomely resented intrusions; books will one day be written that recall CD-ROMs and Russell Athletic sweatshirts in a nostalgic melancholy haze as fervent and foolish as any. We will cut, just for a moment, to London. These days I have a flat in St James’s, that elegant parcel of metropolitan clubland bordered by Piccadilly, Pall Mall, St James’s Street and Lower Regent Street. It suits, I suppose, my self-image — or rather that image of me others have that I often weak-mindedly allow to become my self-image — ‘to live in St James’s. St James’s has long been the natural habitat of the upper class English bachelor. Here he may browse for shirts and ties in Jermyn Street, for hats and shoes in Lock’s and Lobb’s, for foodstuffs in Fortnum’s, for literature in Hatchards and the London Library, and for company m Brooks’s, White’s, Boodle’s, Buck’s or (if tragically pushed) in the improbably named East India, Devonshire, Sports and Public School’s Club where the best school curry in all London can be found, served with sultanas and slices of banana, washed down with lukewarm London tap water poured into stout little Duralex glasses. I have lived in St James’s for the last five years, not a proper English upper class bachelor at all, but tired of Islington, the proper home for people like me, and never at ease west of Hyde Park Corner or south of the Strand. From my window I can see the clock face of Christopher Wren’s handsome church of St James. Behind it — the other side of Piccadilly — Sackville Street leads up to Savile Row and the great Nash curve of Regent Street. In the year 1961 my parents visited Sackville Street, examining each doorway in turn until they came upon a brass plaque on which was written: GABBITAS & THRING SCHOLASTIC AGENCY In the year 1977 I too visited Sackville Street, looking for the brass plaque that still said:

14 GABBITAS & THRING SCHOLASTIC AGENCY I don’t suppose that any writer will ever be able to come up with a partnership that quite matches the ludicrous perfection of the names Gabbitas and Thring. What is a Scholastic Agency? Oh, tish now, and come, come, come.., you know perfectly well. A scholastic agency is a kind of public and prep school dating agency. It acts as a private sector pimp, procuring staff for short-handed schools, placement for jobless teachers and schools for parents at a loss to know where their little ones might thrive. That second service was of interest to me in 1977, and the third to my mother and father in 1961. They wanted to find a prep school for my brother Roger and for me. I was four years old then and Roger well on his way to six. Today of course, what with the establishment of social equality, the smashing of the class system and the achievements of a Nation More At Ease With Itself, by the time your offspring have reached four and five it is far too late to be looking for schools: demand for private education is so high that children must be put down for admission not at birth but in utero, ideally before their first cells have divided. There may be some reading this who are hazy (and proudly so) about the precise meanings of ‘prep school’ and ‘public school’. A prep school is an establishment designed, as the name implies, untypically for a British institution, to prepare a child. In this instance the preparation is for public school. Public school, as the name decidedly does not imply, very typically for a British institution, is wholly private. Public schools undertake to guide, mould and instruct pupils aged between thirteen and eighteen. Prep schools accept their intake from somewhere in the region of eight, nine or ten years old, and prepare them for the Common Entrance Examination, a test recognised by all the public schools. Different public schools are satisfied by different CE results. Thus Winchester, which has an interest in only the cleverest boys, would expect CE marks way above seventy per cent, while Malvern and Worksop and Monckton Combe by way of example, might be content with percentages in the nether fifties or upper forties. There is, it follows, no absolute pass mark in the Common Entrance. Public Schools can decide whom they ‘take according to their need to have a fully pupilled and profitable school roll, according to their own sense of academic reputation, according to a candidate’s athletic, musical or artistic qualities, or according to his status as offspring of an old boy or a Great, Rich and Desirable Parent. At the time of my infancy, the early 1960s, nearly all prep and public schools were single-sex boarding schools. Today, girls are involved to a much greater degree, sometimes only in the Sixth Form, sometimes all the way through. Parents are more reluctant to pack their children off early and may choose to have them attend as day pupils or weekly boarders. Headmasters are younger than they were and more likely to be married. Parents expect more say in the running of a school, to attend more PTA meetings and to complain more vocally about living conditions, discipline and the curriculum. Heating, diet, facilities, syllabus and discipline seem far less Spartan now than they were twenty years ago. But these changes aside, the system, so far as I have been able to

15 ascertain, is much as it was. It is common enough, all things being equal, for a father to send his sons to the prep school he attended as a boy himself. My father, however, had been a chorister at St Paul’s Cathedral and attended its choir school. My brother and I were unlikely to follow in his footsteps. The sound of Roger and Stephen Fry singing, even before Dame Nature had her impertinent pubic way with us, could cause people to stab themselves in the throat with sharpened pencils, jump from high windows, claw out their own inner ears, electrocute their genitals, put on a Jim Reeves record, throw themselves cackling hysterically into the path of moving buses... anything, anything to take away the pain. The cathedral choir school of St Paul’s with its fussy, outworn emphasis on tunefulness and harmony was never going to be an option. Hence Gabbitas and Thing. Young Mr Thring — or it may have been old Mr Gabbitas — recommended Stouts Hill Preparatory School, Uley, Near Dursley, Glos. Something in my mother’s manner had told them that a friendly, warm place was required and few schools came friendlier than Stouts Hill: friendliness was its most notable feature. The school glowed with a kindly familial warmth that enfolded even the most sensitive, apron-clutching child. Founded and headmastered by one Robert Angus, it was effectively run by his four daughters, Carol, Sue, Paddy and Jane. These four Angus girls, young Mr Gabbitas said — and old Mr Thring signified his agreement by giving the desk a mighty thump — were considerate, charming, enthusiastic, sweet-natured and fun. The pupils all rode (for Miss Jane loved ponies and horses to distraction); there were fishing, boating and ice-skating on the lake; traipsing, nutting and blackberrying in the abundant outlying copses and woods; sailing and bird-spotting at Slimbridge and as much running, jumping, cricketing, ruggering, soccering, Latining, Greeking and Common Entrance preparing as the most doting parent could hope for. The diet was well balanced and nutritious, the school uniform amusing and stylish and the fees as frighteningly expensive as any parent could scream at. Every single Gabbitas and each several Thing was united in his commendation of Stouts Hill, Uley, Glos. and they were not afraid who knew it. My parents and Roger too, after a visit of inspection later in the year, approved warmly. When my brother began his first term there the Fry family lived in Chesham, Buckinghamshire. When my turn came to follow him in the summer term of the year 1965, we had moved to Norfolk, the other side of England, two hundred British miles distant from Gloucestershire. When people today hear that I was sent away to board at a school two hundred miles from home at the age of seven they often raise a disapproving eyebrow, snort a contemptuous snort or fling up a despairing hand at the coldness, cruelty and neglect of parents who could do such a thing to a child of such tender years: the words ‘bosom’ and ‘snatching’ and phrases like ‘how could any... ?‘ and ‘at such an age’ and ‘no wonder the British are so...’ are often used. There is great stupidity in this reaction, or at least minimal imagination, which is more or less the same thing, but morally worse. What is forgotten by those who dislike the idea of children being sent away at an early (or any) age is the matter of expectation and custom. The rightness or wrongness of private boarding education is a separate issue and I change my opinion about it as regularly as I change my socks, the desktop pattern on my computer screen and my views on God. When I was seven years old every child that I knew of my own age went away to

16 boarding school. Again the rightness or wrongness of being friendly only with children from similar backgrounds is a separate issue. ‘The point is that my father had been to boarding school, my mother had been to boarding school, all the friends I had in the world went away to boarding school. It was what one did. It was Life as I knew it. A ‘child of seven does not question such a circumstance: it is the way of the world. If I had not been sent away I should have wondered what was wrong with me. I should have felt neglected and left out. At a local day school I most emphatically should not have felt more loved or more cared for, far from it. Going round to play with friends in the school holidays and listening to their stories of boarding school would have left me feeling miserably excluded and inexplicably singled out for strange and unusual punishment. I know this for a fact, for I did spend a term at a primary school and, sweet and friendly as the place was, I couldn’t wait to leave and join my brother. Had we lived in Central London I dare say it might have been different. As it was we were hidden in the mysterious interior of rural East Anglia, where the nearest shop was a twenty-minute bicycle ride away and the nearest friends many miles farther. There was no door-bell ringing and can-Stephen-come-out-to-play-ing in Booton, Norfolk: no cool friends called Zak and Barnaby and Luke, no parks, no Saturday morning cinema clubs, no milk-shake parlours, no buses, no visiting ice-cream vans, no roller-skating rinks. When city-bred friends saw the house I lived in, they cooed with envy and delight at the idea of so much space with so much nature all around. I used to coo with envy when I stayed in a terraced house in suburban London and saw fitted carpets, central heating and drawing-rooms that were called sitting-rooms and had televisions in them. It is also true that the ineptly hidden distress of my mother at the end of the school holidays gave me more direct, clear testament of absolute love than most children are ever lucky enough to receive at such an early age. That I was fucked up as a child and then as a youth, I cannot deny. That my fucked-up-edness sprang from a sense of betrayal, desertion or withheld love I will not allow. Roger, my adorable brother, was and is far from fucked up after all, and he was the first to be sent away and might reasonably be expected to have felt the greater sense of abandonment, there being no elder in whose footsteps he might follow. Jo, my adorable sister, wasn’t sent away at all, as girls weren’t by then. She was fairly fucked up as a teenager but arguably because of the very fact that she didn’t go to boarding school. Private education may be a divisive abomination, it may leave its product weird and ridiculous in all kinds of insanitary and peculiar ways, it may have held back the social development of this country, it may be responsible for all kinds of disasters and unpleasantnesses, but in my case it never left me feeling starved of parental love and attention. I think it safe to say that I would have been a fucked up youth had I been given a secondary modern, comprehensive or grammar school education. Whether at boarding school, day school or at home with governesses and private tutors, I would always have been as screwed up as an unwanted letter from the Reader’s Digest. Wherever I had been, whatever I had done, I should have experienced an adolescence of sturm, drang, disaster and embarrassment. This is all speculation. The facts are that my brother went to Stouts Hill, my sister was born and then the family moved to Norfolk. Leaving Buckinghamshire meant leaving Chesham ‘Prep, a day school where I had been having my preprep education. The town of Chesham perches itself between London

17 Underground’s Metropolitan Line and the Chiltern Hills embarrassedly unsure as to its status: country town or Metroland banlieu? Chesham Prep had four Houses — a House being a nominal administrative subdivision or gau, that is, not a physical building. I was in Christopher Columbus, and sported its blue badge with great pride. It took me many years to understand or truly believe that Columbus was actually Italian. Even to this day I can’t fully accept it. Why would a school in the heart of England choose a foreign hero? Perhaps they were unaware of his nationality themselves. It was common knowledge that the British discovered everything —trains, democracy, television, printing, jets, hover- crafts, the telephone, penicillin, the flush lavatory and Australia, so it was reasonable to assume Christopher Columbus must have been a Briton. Francis Drake boys — or was the other House Nelson... or Walter Raleigh perhaps? I can’t quite remember — wore badges of flaming vermilion. Chesham Prep was a coeducational school and my girlfriend, the object of my warm six-year-old affection, was Amanda Brooke, from whose soft charcoal lambswool V-neck glowed Florence Nightingale’s proud primrose yellow. Her sister Victoria’s jersey flashed with the lime green of Gladys Aylward, Innkeeper of the Sixth Happiness. Victoria was Roger’s girlfriend, which kept things neat and in the family, so to speak. It shames me to remember that eleven years and a couple of expulsions later, at seventeen and on the run from home, I was to return to Chesham, stay as a guest of the Brooke girls and steal a Diner’s Club card from their father before running off on a wild nationwide spending spree that ended in prison and disgrace. It was in the playground of Chesham Prep that I tripped and fell on my face one morning and broke my nose. At the time my nose was a cute little button — if any part of me has ever been cute — and the accident, although bloody and loud, was unremarkable in the life of a small child. Over the years however, my nose grew and grew and it became apparent’ by the time I was fourteen that, like its owner, it was not growing straight. From time to time through my teens and beyond I would say, ‘I must get this damned nose straightened one day...’ to which a gushing chorus would always reply, ‘Oh no, Stephen, you mustn’t... it’s so distinguished.’ There is of course nothing distinguished about a bent nose. A duelling scar may rightly be’ called distinguished, as might a slightly cleft chin or a glamorously imperceptible limp, but a bent nose is idiotic and unpleasant. I suppose people were trying to be kind and protect me from the humiliation of discovering that, even after an operation to straighten my ridiculous nose, I would still look a mess. The trauma of finding out that a straight-nosed Stephen looked every bit as unappetising as a bent-nosed Stephen might have tipped me completely over the edge. We keep our insignificant blemishes so that we can blame them for our larger defects. The problem of my bent nose comes to mind when I have regular arguments with a friend on political subjects. He is firmly of the opinion that the existence of the monarchy, the aristocracy and the House of Lords is absurd, unjust and outdated. It would be hard to disagree with that. He believes, however, that in the name of liberty and social justice they should be abolished. This is where we part company. I think of the monarchy and aristocracy as Britain’s bent nose. Foreigners find our ancient nonsenses distinguished, while we think them ridiculous and are determined to do something about them one day. I fear that when we do get rid of them, as I suppose we shall, we are going to let ourselves in for the psychic shock of

18 discovering that the process has not made us one jot freer or one ounce more socially equitable a country than France, say, or the United States of America. We will remain just as we are, about as free as those countries. We are probably not quite as free at the moment (whatever free might mean) or as socially just (ditto) as the Benelux countries or Scandinavia, and as it happens, Scandinavia and the Benelux countries have monarchs. There will be great psychological damage done to us if we take the step of constitutional cosmetic alteration. The world would stare at us and whisper and giggle about us excitedly, as people always do when friends have had some sort of plastic surgery. We would unwind our bandages, present our new, straight-nosed constitution to the international community and await the fawning compliments and gasps of admiration. How hurt we will be when we see that the international community is actually yawning and, far from being dazzled by the blaze of justice and freedom and beauty that radiates from our features, they are rather indignant that instead of dining in splendour and pageantry with a crowned. monarch, their heads of state will in future be lunching at President Hattersley’s Residence or sipping tea with Lady Thatcher in some converted People’s Palace. Britain would suddenly have no absurd minor blemish to blame for its failures, which are of course no more than the defects of being human. If we concentrated on our real defects; if we blamed our weakness of political will for impeding the achievement of greater social justice rather than pretending that it is all the fault of harmless warts and daft mannerisms, then we might indeed be better off. The trouble with doing a thing for cosmetic reasons is that one always ends up with a cosmetic result, and cosmetic results, as we know from inspecting rich American women, are ludicrous, embarrassing and horrific. But of course, I am a sentimentalist, and sentimentalists will hunt for any excuse to maintain the more harmless fripperies of the status quo. Hey, we are straying far from our sheep, as they say in France. I was at Chesham Prep, six years old with a budding bent nose and I was going to tell you all about the boy from the Gape. At Chesham Prep, my form mistress Mrs Edwards gave us all italic pencils which we were allowed to sharpen with knives. She wrote with flat-sided chalk on the blackboard and italic lettering was ever her theme, her message, her purpose and her passion. We were not allowed to write so much as our own names with italic pencils until we had covered page after page of our rough books, first with wavy lines going up and down, up and down, up and down, next with all the letters of the alphabet unjoined, and finally with all the letters of the alphabet joined up in approved style. To this day, every six months or so, at a stationer’s, I will buy an Osmiroid calligraphic writing set and practise my italic shapes, thick thin, thick thin, thick thin. I will rule constraining lines and write the alphabet within them, and then I will write the same favourite words from those days: I have always especially loved the way italic tools will render the dots on the letters ‘i’ and ‘j’, thus — i j — so I take great pleasure in the look of words like — jiving skiving Hawaii jiu-jitsu

19 — and most especially — Fiji Fijian After a few days of this kind of arseing about, I will leave the lids off the pens, the nibs will go dry and the special ink will harden into a gummy resin. A week or so later I throw the whole kit away and wonder what the hell I have been playing at. In the middle of my last term in Mrs Edwards’ class a very pretty boy with fair hair and a wide smile arrived. He had come from Cape Town and Mrs Edwards adored him. His italic lettering was as gorgeous as he was and I found myself torn between resentment and infatuation. The boys I fell for subsequently were usually very neat and very well behaved. Far too well behaved for my liking. Every action and gesture of the boy from Cape Town (who might have been called Jonathan, although perhaps that’s a trick of affinity — something to do with the publishers Jonathan Cape) reminded me of my clumsiness of line. My upstrokes were bulky and badly proportioned, his were graceful and pure; my fingers were always inky while his were always clean, finished off with perfect nails. He had out-turned lips that were most luscious then, but are today probably of that strangely opened out, overmoist quality as common to ex-colonials of the southern hemisphere as sandy eyelashes and wide hips. I expect now he looks like Ernie Els or Kerry Packer. Shame. Perhaps the boy from Cape Town set the pattern for all the love that lay in store for me. Strange thought. I haven’t ever recalled him to mind before this minute. I hope this book isn’t to become regression therapy. How unpleasant for you. I do wonder though if he still writes in italics as he did when we were infants, thirty-four years ago. Sex of course, meant nothing to me. Bottoms and willies featured greatly in life at Chesham from the age of three onwards and they gave perpetual amusement, suffused with intense, muffled delight. There was a boy called Timothy who sat next to me in Mrs Edwards’ class. We would pull the back of our shorts and underpants down as we sat at our desks, so that we could feel our bare bottoms against the wooden seats. From the front, to Mrs Edwards’ eye, everything would look normal. This excited me hugely: both the bareness of bottom and the secrecy were inexplicably delicious. Not to the point of erection you understand, at least not so far as I remember. Timothy and I would sometimes go into the woods together to play what we called Rudies. Rudies involved peeing up against a tree in as high an arc as we could manage or watching each other poo. All very mysterious. I can’t pretend that I find anything appealing in that sexual arena today, although I know that many august personages are highly pleased by the idea. One is always hearing about those who pay prostitutes to empty their bowels on to glass- topped coffee-tables under which the client lies in a frenzy of excitement, pressing his face up against the excremental outpush. We think this all very English, but as a matter of fact a trawl through the grosser areas of Internet Usenet postings will show that Americans, as in all things outré, win the palm with ease. I haven’t looked in on the newsgroup alt.binaries.tasteless for a year or so now but it’s quite clear there’s a big world of scatological weirdness out there. The French come next: I don’t suppose anyone who has done so will forget the experience of reading de Sade’s The One Hundred and Twenty Days of Sodom and those elegantly disengaged descriptions of the bishop’s way with coffee. Then there was that French intellectual and structuralist hero who liked to lie

20 in a trough in gay bars and be pissed on by strangers. No, it may come as a disappointment to you, but the fact is we British are no weirder than anyone else when it comes to sexual oddity, we just think we are, which is the basis of our weirdness. Just as it is the love of money that it is the root of all evil, so it is the belief in shamefulness that is the root of all misery. I can’t for the life of me remember where the woods were that we visited for our rather tame rudies or who Timothy was. His name wasn’t Timothy of course, and if he is reading this book now he has probably forgotten the escapades entirely and is reciting it to his wife by the fireside as an example of how he was always right about that disgusting Stephen Fry chap. I have no memories of early ‘sex-games’, as the Kinsey and Hite people like to call them, which involved the opposite sex. A girl did once show me her knickers and I remember finding the elastic and the colour unappealing. I can’t recall wanting to know or see more. A friend of mine at university, asked when he knew he was gay, said that he distinctly remembered at the moment of his birth looking back up there and saying, ‘Well! That’s the last time I’m ever going up one of those...’ I have since shamelessly used this as my own explanation of When I Knew. I liked girls greatly, except when they bullied me or pursed their lips prissily and said, ‘Um! Telling on you...’ The inelegance of my italics, the shimmering beauty of Jonathan Cape and those occasional rudies with Timothy aside, my six-year-old life is hidden for the moment in an impenetrable mist. I know that I could read well at three and write accurately at four, and that I never ever learned my times table. In Chesham we dwelt in a very Betjemanesque kind of road called Stanley Avenue. Sherwood House where we lived has since been pulled down and replaced by a housing estate that calls itself a Close. I suppose that means Sherwood House must have been large, but I only remember a few details: a stained glass entrance porch; a booth where a black telephone with a sliding drawer under it lived — the dial had the letters in red so that one could easily call PUTney 4234 and CENtral 5656. 1 loved to bang the hard bakelite cradle up and down and listen to the hollow, echoing clicks it sent down the line. Sounds are not as evocative as smells, but to anyone over the age of thirty-five the old dialling and hanging-up tones are as instant a transport to the past as the clunking of half- crowns and the thlop of the indicator flipping up on an old Austin motorcar. I was intensely fascinated by the telephone. Not in the way of a teenage girl chattering for hours lying on her stomach with her thighs pressed together and ankles crossed in the air, but intrigued by how it changed people. In those days, when you were cut off you would rattle the cradle and shout, ‘Operator! Operator!’ Older people still do it. They don’t know that it’s as fruitless as pulling at a servant’s bell or asking for the Left Luggage office. They don’t know that in the world today... THERE’S NO ONE THERE They don’t know that the Bible is a Customer Service Announcement and that purgatory is when St Peter puts you on hold and sends you into a self-contained menu- driven loop of tone button operated eternity to the sound of Vivaldi’s ‘Spring’.

21 The very word ‘Hello’ only earned its sense of a greeting after the American phone companies hunted about for a new word with which telephonic conversations could politely, unsuggestively and neutrally be initiated, much as the BBC in the 19305 threw open the debate as to what someone who watched television might be called. The wireless had listeners, should television have watchers? Viewer, of course, was the word decided upon. In the case of telephony, the aim was to stop people saying ‘Who is that?’ or ‘How do you do?’ or even ‘Howdy’. ‘Good morning’ and ‘Good day’ had a somewhat valedictory flavour, as well as being of doubtful use in a country divided up into so many time zones. Prior to the 1890s ‘hello!’ had simply been an exclamation of surprise and interest, with obvious venery overtones. By the turn of the century everyone was writing songs and newspaper articles about ‘Hello Girls’ and beginning to use the word in real life as salutation’s vanilla-flavoured, everyday, entry-level model. My favourite telephone fact, for this was the time, as I approached seven, that I began to collect facts instead of butterflies, stamps or football cards, was that Alexander Graham Bell was said to have made the following entirely endearing remark soon after he had invented the telephone: ‘I do not think I am exaggerating the possibilities of this invention,’ he said, ‘when I tell you that it is my firm belief that one day there will be a telephone in every major town in America.’ In those days, my father actually went out to work, so I suppose I associate the telephone with my mother and Chesham, its laurels and shrubs and nearby ticking Atco mowers and with a suburban idyll so soon to be replaced in Norfolk by spooky attics, rural isolation and permanent paternal presence. Sherwood House in my mind is where Just William’s William lived, it is where Raffles and Bunny went when they wanted to relieve aparvenue of her pearls, it is where Aunt Julia had her Wimbledon fastness in Wodehouse’s Ukridge stories. In Sherlock Holmes it is the house of the Norwood Builder and the mysterious Pondicherry Lodge. In fact, it is easier for me to remember Sherwood House by opening a page of any one of those books and allowing the flood of image to take over than it is for me to sit down and make a concentrated attempt at genuine recall. My mother occasionally taught English to foreign students and history at nearby colleges and schools, but I think of her at a typewriter in the dining room, with myself curled under her feet staring into a gas fire and listening to Mrs Dale’s Diary. Twenty Questions and The Archers. Or hearing her voice rise in pitch and volume and decrease in speed and sense when the telephone had rung and she had hurried through to the booth in the hall to answer it. I swear it is less than five years since I last heard her say down the line in her kindest clear-and-slow-for-foreigners voice: ‘If you are in a call-box, press button B...’ Buttons A and B must have vanished from payphones twenty years ago. That is my image of infancy. Just me, glowing in the combined warmth of the gas fire, my big-bellied mother and her Ferguson wireless. If it felt in a sociable mood, our Siamese cat would join us, but in my memory we are alone. Sometimes we will get up, my mother stretching, hands on hips and, after she has found a headscarf and a raincoat, we will leave the house. We visit the hairdresser’s, the Home and Colonial Stores, the Post Office, and finally Quell’s where I noisily hoover up a raspberry milkshake while my mother closes her eyes in bliss as she spoons in a melon or tomato sorbet. On the way back we feed stale crusts to the ducks in the park. All the way there and back, she will talk to me. Tell me things. What words mean. Why cars have number-plates. How she

22 met Daddy. Why she must go into hospital soon to have a baby. She makes up stories about a koala called Bananas. In one adventure Bananas comes to England to visit relations at Whipsnade for Christmas and suffers terribly because of the cold, the foolish animal. having packed only his shorts, swimming trunks and sandals in the expectation that Buckinghamshire would be boiling hot in December. I giggle, as we children do, at the stupidity of those who don’t know things that we have only just been taught ourselves. Life has been downhill ever since. Or do I mean uphill? As we reach Stanley Avenue, we race for the house and, pregnant as she is, Mother always nearly wins. She was athletic at school and kept goal for the England schoolgirls’ hockey team. There were au pair girls at Chesham, German or Scandiwegian usually, there was Mrs Worrell who scrubbed, there was Roger and in the evenings, there was the terrifying prospect of Father. But in my memory there is Mother at the typewriter (once she loudly said ‘fuck’ forgetting I was under her chair) and there is me, gazing into the blue and orange flames. One morning I was off school, whether shamming or genuinely sick I can’t remember. Mother came into my bedroom, hands wearily pressed against hips, and told me that the time had come for her to go into hospital. Roger had once attempted to tell me how pregnancy came about. One or both of us became a little confused and the picture in my head was that of my father as a kind of gardener, dropping a small seed into my mother’s tummy-button and watering it with his pee. A peculiar image I suppose, but to a race of Martians no stranger than the unwieldy truth. The upshot of all this was a baby girl, Joanna. Her middle name Roselle came from my mother’s own Viennese mother. It became my particular joy to help feed and dress this new sister and my most burning ambition to be the first person she smiled at. I was now officially a middle child. The next week we left Chesham and headed for Norfolk. 2 It is January 1965. Roger, who is eight, has returned to Stouts Hill for his second term. I am considered a spot too young. I am due to follow him in the summer so in the meantime I attend for one time-marking term a Church of England primary school in the village of Cawston, a mile from our new house in Booton. Cawston Primary School was run by John Kett, descended from Kett of Kett’s Rebellion, the Kett who ended his days hanging from chains on the ramparts of Norwich Castle. The twentieth-century descendant is a kindly figure who writes books on Norfolk dialect and is much loved and looked up to by everyone for miles around. Whether he shares his noisome ancestor’s belief in eastern independence I could not say, but I am certain that were today’s fashion for devolution to be continued into the ancient kingdoms of England, he would be a very natural candidate for King of Anglia — perhaps with Delia Smith as his consort. ‘I need a volunteer,’ Miss Meddlar said one day.





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




23 My hand shot up. ‘Oh, Miss, me Miss! Please Miss!’ ‘Very well, Stephen Fry.’ Miss Meddlar always called me by both names. It is one of my chief memories of primary school, that of being Stephen Fry all the time. I suppose Miss Meddlar felt first names were too informal and surnames too cold and too affected for a decent, Christian village school. ‘Take this to Mr Kett’s class please, Stephen Fry.’ ‘This’ was a sheet of paper bearing test results. Spelling and Adding Up. I had annoyed myself by getting one answer wrong in the spelling round. I had spelled the word ‘many’ with two ‘n’s. Everyone else had made the same mistake but compounded the error by using an ‘e’, so Miss Meddlar had given me half a point for knowing about the ‘a’. I took the sheet of paper from her knowing that my name headed the list with nineteen and a half out of twenty. Out in the corridor I walked towards Mr Kett’s classroom door. I stood there ready to knock when I heard laughter coming from inside. No one in life, not the wartiest old dame in Arles, not the wrinkledest, stoopingest Cossack, not the pony-tailedest, venerablest old Mandarin in China, not Methuselah himself, will ever be older than a group of seniors at school. They are like Victorian photographs of sporting teams. No matter how much more advanced in years you are now than the age of those in the photograph, they will always look a world older, always seem more capable of growing a bigger moustache and holding more alcohol. The sophistication with which they sit and the air of maturity they give off is unmatchable by you. Ever. The laughter from inside Mr Kett’s room came from nine- and ten-year-olds, but they were nine- and ten-year-olds whose age I will never reach, whose maturity and seniority I can never hope to emulate. There was something in the way their laughter seemed to share a mystery with Mr Kett, a mystery of olderness, that turned my knees to water. I pulled back my hand from the door just in time to stop it from knocking, and fled to the changing room. I sat panting on a bench by the lockers staring miserably at Miss Meddlar’s sheet of paper. I couldn’t go through with it. I just couldn’t walk into that senior classroom. I knew what would happen if I did, and I rehearsed the scene in my head, rehearsed it in such detail that I believed that I actually had done it, just as a scared diver on the high board finds his stomach whoomping with the shock of a jump he has made only in his mind. I shivered at the thought of how the scene would go. I would knock. ‘Come in,’ Mr Kett would say. I would open the door and stand at the threshold, knees wobbling, eyes downcast. ‘Ah. Stephen Fry. And what can I do for you, young man?’ ‘Please, Mr Kett. Miss Meddlar told me to give you this.’ The seniors would start to laugh. A sort of contemptuous, almost annoyed laughter. What is this squidge, this fly, this nothing doing in our mature room, where we were maturely sharing a mature joke with Mr Kett? Look at him... his shorts are all ruckled up and... my God... are those StartRite sandals, he’s wearing? Jesus... My name being first on the list would only make it worse. ‘Well, Master Fry. Nineteen and a half out of twenty! A bit of a brain box, by the

24 look of things!’ Almost audible sneers at this and a more muttered, angry kind of laughter. Spelling! Adding up for Christ’s sake... No, it was intolerable. Unthinkable. I couldn’t go in there. I wanted to run away. Not home. Just away. To run and run and run and run. Yet I was too frightened to do that either. Oh dear. Oh double dear. Such terrible, terrible misery. And all because I had done well. All because I had stretched up my hand so high and squealed ‘Oh, Miss, me Miss! Please Miss’ so loudly and so insistently. It was all wrong, the world was all wrong. I was Stephen Fry in a changing room in a small -school in Norfolk and I wanted to be someone else. Someone else in another country in another age in another world. I looked down at Miss Meddlar’s piece of paper. My name at the top was running saltily into the name of Darren Wright below. Darren Wright had fourteen marks out of twenty. Fourteen was a much more sensible mark. Not at all embarrassing. Why couldn’t I have scored fourteen? I screwed the paper into a ball and stuffed it into a wellington boot. It was Mary Hench’s wellington boot. It said so in clear black writing on Elastoplast stuck to the inside. Mary Hench and I were friends, so maybe she wouldn’t tell if she found it. I stood up and wiped my nose. Oh dear. Over the next ten years I was to find myself alone in changing rooms many, many times more, the longest ten years of my life. This occasion was innocent and infantile, those future visits guiltier and more wicked by far. To this day institutional changing rooms make my heart beat with a very heavy hammerblow of guilt. The feeling of wanting not to be Stephen Fry, wanting to be someone else in another country in another age, that was to return to me many times too. I left this ur-changing room, this primal prototype of all the changing rooms that were to be, and had no sooner sunk tremblingly back into my seat in Miss Meddlar’s classroom than the bell went for morning break. As was my habit I joined Mary Hench and the other girls at the edge of the playground, hard by the painted hopscotch lines. She was a large girl, Mary Hench, with gentle brown eyes and a pleasant lisp. We liked to bounce tennis balls against the wall and talk about how stupid boys were while we watched them playing football and fighting in the middle of the playground. Soft, she called them. Boys were soft. Sometimes I was soft, but usually I was daft, which was a little better. With Mary Hench was Mabel Tucker, the girl I sat next to in Miss Meddlar’s. Mabel Tucker wore National Health spectacles and I of course called her Table Mucker which she hated. She would shout out loudly in class when I farted, which I did not believe to be playing the game. ‘Please, Miss. Stephen Fry’s just farted.’ Not on. Outside of enough. You were supposed to giggle secretly and delightedly or pull your sweater up over your nose. To draw adult attention to the event was quite monstrously wrong. Besides, I wasn’t sure that adults knew about farting. Just as break was coming to an end, I saw, out of the corner of my eye, Miss Meddlar surveying the playground. I tried to hide behind Mary Hench, who was bigger than me, but she told me not to be so soft and pushed me ahead. ‘Stephen Fry,’ said Miss Meddlar. ‘Yes, Miss?’

25 ‘Mr Kett says that you never did give him that sheet of paper.’ Boys and girls were pushing past me on their way back to their classes. ‘No, Miss. That’s right, Miss. He wasn’t in his classroom. He must have gone out. So I left it on his desk.’ Said airily. Jauntily. Insouciantly. ‘Oh. Oh I see,’ Miss Meddlar looked a little confused, but in no sense incredulous. With a calm ‘if there’s nothing further?’ cock of the eyebrow, I moved on. At lunch Mr Kett came to my table and sat down opposite me. I felt a thousand eyes burning into me. ‘Now then, young man. What’s this about me not being in the classroom this morning? I never left my classroom.’ ‘Well, I knocked, sir, but you didn’t answer.’ ‘You knocked?’ ‘Yes, sir. As you didn’t answer I went away. ‘Miss Meddlar says you said you left the mark sheet on my desk.’ ‘Oh no, sir. As you didn’t answer my knock I went away. ‘I see.’ A pause, while, all hot and prickly, I looked down at my lunch. ‘Well, if you give me the mark sheet now then...’ ‘Sir?’ ‘I’ll take it now.’ ‘Oh. I lost it, sir.’ ‘You lost it?’ ‘Sir. In break.’ A puzzled look spread over Mr Kett’s face. Get to know that puzzled look, Stephen Fry. You will see it many times. For Narcissus to find himself desirable, the water he looks into must be clear and calm and sweet. If a person looks into a turbulent pool his reflection will be dark and disturbed. That was Mr Kett’s face, rippled with dark perturbation. He was being lied at, but lied at so well and for so impenetrable a reason. I can see his perplexity so clearly. It looms before me now and the turbulence in his eyes makes me look very ugly indeed. Here was a bright boy, very bright. He came from a big house up the road: his parents, although newcomers to Norfolk, seemed nice people — even qualifying for what used to be called awfully nice. Their boy was only here at this little school for a term before he went away to prep school. Kett was a man of his village and therefore a man of the world. He had seen bright children before, he had seen children of the upper middle classes before. This boy seemed presentable enough, charming enough, decent enough and here he was telling the lie direct without so much as a blush or stammer. Maybe I’m over-refining. There is very little chance that John Kett remembers that day. In fact, I know he doesn’t. Of course I’m over-refining. I’m reading into the incident what I want to read into it. Like all teachers, John Kett overlooked and pardoned those thousands of revelatory moments in which the children under his care exposed the animal inside them. Every day he must bid good morning to men and women, parents now themselves, whom once he witnessed thrashing about in mad tantrum, whom once he saw wetting themselves, whom

26 once he saw bullying or being bullied, whom once he saw bursting into terrified screams at the sight of spider or the sound of distant thunder, whom once he saw torturing ladybirds. True, a cold lie is worse than animal savagery or hot fright, but that lie is and always was, my problem, not John Kett’s. This Affair of the Test Results in Mary Hench’s Wellington Boot is a big episode for me simply because I remember it so clearly: it is significant, in other words, because I have decided that it is significant and that in itself is of significance to me. I suppose it seems to mark in my mind the beginning of what was to become a pattern of lonely lies and public exposures. The virtue of this particular lie was that it was pointless, a pure lie, its vice that it was so consciously, so excellently done. When Kett sat down to question me at the lunch table I had been nervous — mouth dry, heart thumping, hands clammy — but the moment I began to speak I found I became more than simply nerveless, I became utterly confident and supremely myself. It was as if I had discovered my very purpose in life. To put one over, to dupe: to deceive not only without shame, but with pride, with real pride. Private pride, that was always the problem. Not a pride I could share in the playground, but a secret pride to hug to myself like miser’s gold or pervert’s porn. The hours leading up to exposure would have me sweating with fear, but the moment itself would define me: I became charged, excited and happy, while at the same time maintaining absolute outward calm and confidence, able to calculate in microseconds. Telling lies would bring about in me that state the sportsman knows when he is suddenly in form, when the timing becomes natural and rhythmic, the sound of the bat/racket/club/cue sweet and singing: he is simultaneously relaxed and in deepest concentration. I could almost claim that the moment the police snapped the cuffs about my wrists eleven years later was one of the happiest of my life. Of course, someone might try to make the connection between all this and acting. When acting is going well, the same feeling of mastery of time, of rhythm, control and timing comes over one. Acting, after all, is lying, lying for the pure exquisite joy of it, you might think. Only acting isn’t that, not to me at any rate. Acting is telling truth for the pure, agonising hell of it. People always think that actors make good liars: it seems a logical thought, just as one might imagine that an artist would make a good forger of other people’s signatures. I don’t think there’s any especial truth in either assumption. Things I often heard from parents and schoolteachers. ‘It’s not that you did it, but that you lied about it.’ ‘Why did you lie?’ ‘It’s as if you actually wanted to get caught.’ ‘Don’t lie to me, again, Fry. You’re a terrible liar.’ No I’m not, I used to think to myself. I’m a brilliant liar. So brilliant that I do it when there isn’t even the faintest chance of being believed. That’s lying for the sake of it, not lying purely to achieve some fatuous end. That’s real lying. All of this is going to return us to Samuel Anthony Farlowe Bunce before long. First I will tell you what in reality John Kett chooses to remember about me. One by- product of slebdom is that those who taught you are often asked to comment about your

27 young self. Sometimes they do it in newspapers, sometimes they do it in public. A few years ago I was asked by John Kett’s successor to open the Cawston School Fete, or Grand Summer Fair, to give it its due title. Anyone who grew up in the country twenty or thirty years ago knows a lot about fetes. Fetes worse than death, as my father called them with self-ironising ho-ho jocularity. At East Anglian country gatherings there was dwile flonking — now sadly being replaced by the more self-conscious urban appeal of welly throwing. There was bowling for a pig — in those days country people knew how to look after a pig, I expect today’s average Norfolk citizen if confronted by such an animal would scream, run away and sue. There was throwing a wet sponge at the rector (or vicar — generally speaking Norfolk villages thought it smarter to have a rector than a vicar — I believe the difference is, or was, that the bishop chooses a vicar and the local landowner chooses a rector). There were bottle stalls, bran tubs filled with real bran, Guess the Weight of the Ram for a Penny competitions, coconut shies and tractor or traction engine rides for sixpence. If my brother, sister and I were very lucky, a local fete might offer Harry Woodcock, a local watchmender and seller of ornaments, whose shop sign proclaimed him to be: HARRY WOODCOCK ‘The Man You Know’ Woodcock went from fete to fete carrying with him a bicycle wheel attached to a board. The wheel had radiating from its centre like the minute hand of a clock an arrow which was spun for prizes. Nicky Campbell does much the same thing on British television, and Merv Griffin’s American original The Wheel of Fortune has been showing on ABC for decades. Harry Woodcock blew such professionals out of the water and left them for dead. He wore extravagantly trimmed pork-pie hats and pattered all the while like a cockney market trader. East End spiel m a Norfolk accent is a very delicious thing to hear. My sister approached me during one such Saturday afternoon fete just as I was estimating how many mint imperials there might be in a huge jar that an archdeacon bore beamingly about a thronged deanery garden. ‘You’ll never guess who’s here ...‘ ‘Not...?' ‘Yup. The Man You Know.’ And off we scampered. ‘Hello there, young man!’ boomed The Man You Know, tipping his hat as he did to everyone and everything. ‘And young Miss Fry too.’ ‘Hello, Mr Man You Know,’ we chorused, striving with a great effort of will not to dissolve into a jelly of rude giggles. We paid a shilling and received a ticketyboo each. These were blocks of polished wood with a number from nought to twenty painted on each side. All tickety-boos were to be tossed back into a basket, to another tip of the hat, after each spin of the wheel. The Man You Know had attempted some grace with the brush when painting the numbers, giving each digit a little flourish. I could picture him the day he made them — they were decades old by this time — his tongue would have been poking out, as it did when he examined broken watches, while he sissed and haahed

28 out his breath and ruined each wooden block with too much of an effort to be decorative and neat. My sister, who had and has great talent with brush and pen, could have stroked out twenty numbers in twenty seconds and each one would have been graceful and fine and easy. There was a mournful clumsiness about The Man You Know, his dignity and his tickety-boos. As indeed there was about his patter. ‘Roll, bowl or pitch. You never do know, unless you ever do know. Lady Luck is in a monstrous strange mood this afternoon, my booties. She’s a piece, that Lady Luck and no mistake. A lucky twenty tickety-boos and a lucky twenty numbers, each one solid gold, or my name’s not Raquel Welsh. You can’t accoomerlate, less you specerlate, now if that aren’t the truth I’m not the Man You Know. And I am, oh yes, but I am. I yam, I yam, I yam, as the breadfruit said to Captain Bligh. Here’s a fine gentlemen: two more punters needed fore I can spin, better give me a bob, sir — you might win a present to keep that wife a yours from straying. Thanking you kindlier than you deserve. Here comes a lovely lady. My mistake, it’s the curate, no, that is a lovely lady. Up you step, my bootiful darling, I shan’t let you go — that’s either a shilling for a tickety-boo or you give me the biggest smacker of a kiss that you ever did give in all your born days. Blast, another shilling. I’d rather a had the kiss. Lays and gen’men... The Man You Know is about to spin. The world...’ here he would hold his finger exaggeratedly to his lips, ‘the world.., she hold her breath.’ And so the world did hold her breath. The world, she held her breath and the wheel ticked round. Well, the world has stopped holding her breath. She has exhaled and blown us a gust of bouncy castles and aluminium framed self-assembly stalls that sell strange seamed tickets of purple pulped paper that you rip open and litter the grass with when you find that you have not won a huge blue acrylic bear. The side-shows we queue for now are the Ride in the All New Vauxhall 4X4 Frontera (courtesy Jack Claywood Vauxhall Ltd.), the Virtual Reality Shoot Out and the chance to Guess the RAM of the Compaq PC, kindly provided by PC Explosion of Norwich. Hang on, I hear the voice of Mary Hench telling me that I’ve gone soft. Thinking about the countryside can do that to me. When I was a literature student one was for ever reading that all great literature was and always had been about the tension between civilisation and savagery: • Apollo and Dionysus • Urbs et rus • Court and forest • City and arcadia • Pall Mall and maypole • Town and country • High street and hedgerow • Metropolis and Smallville • Urban sprawl and rural scrub It is fitting that as I write this I am half-listening to David Bellamy, Jeremy Irons and Johnny Morris as they address a mass rally gathered in Hyde Park. They are warning the

29 nation about the danger being done the countryside by urban ignorance and misplaced metropolitan sentimentality. The point d’appui of the rally was to save fox-hunting, but it seems to have turned into something bigger. I’ve just turned on the television.., it is a huge crowd, almost as large as the number of townies who flock to the Yorkshire Dales every Sunday, but these people, I suspect, will at least leave the park tidy and free of litter. I suppose some rat-faced weasel from New Maiden will be interviewed at any minute to give the other side of the hunting debate. Bingo! I’m right. Though by the sound of him he’s from Romford rather than New Malden. And he’s just described fox-hunting as ‘barbaric’, which is peculiar since he’s the one with the stutter. Forgive the pedantry of a frustrated classicist. They should have asked a fox instead. ‘Would you rather be hunted by hounds, gassed, trapped, poisoned or shot, old darling?’ ‘Well, since you mention it, I’d rather be left alone.’ ‘Ng... but given that that isn’t an option?’ ‘No? Thought not. It never is, is it?’ ‘Well, you know. Lambs. Chicken farms. Hysterical people hearing you rootling through their wheelie bins at night.’ ‘I like a nice wheelie bin.’ ‘Yes, that’s as may be, but which way would you rather be killed?’ ‘Think I’ll stick to dogs if it’s all the same to you. A fox knows where he is with hounds. My direct ancestors have lived in the same place, hunted by hounds every winter, for three hundred years. Hounds are simply hopeless when you come down to it.’ That’s enough about town and country. I was supposed to be telling you about John Kett and the Cawston Village Fete. As it happens, there’s a story about a mole fast approaching, so animals won’t be left out. Opening the Cawston School Fete counted as both duty and pleasure. I was an Old Boy, I had a connection, something to do, other than wander about with my hands behind my back like minor royalty inspecting a dialysis machine. I could revisit the changing room for example, savour once more the poster-paint tang of the art cupboard and see if the hopscotch rink had been repainted since Table Mucker’s championship season. The Cawston Fete was not quite the miracle of yesterdecade, but — an alarming exhibition of tae kwando given by local boys aside — there was enough of a smell of oversugared sponge cake and faintly fermenting strawbails to remind me of when the world was young and guilty. I wandered from stall to stall in a sort of daze, interrupted now and then by the shy murmur of, ‘I don’t suppose you’ll remember me...’ Table Mucker had grown an explosive pair of breasts and a large brood of daughters the eldest of whom looked ready to start production on her own. Mary Hench grinned at me from behind a downy moustache and a fierce girlfriend (clearly boys were still soft in her book) while John Kett himself seemed unchanged from the man whose puzzled eyes had lived with me in silent reproach for twenty-five years. ‘Well, young man, I expect everything seems to have shrunk since last you were here.’ I agreed and he turned the subject to moles.

30 Moles? Other people at the fete had mentioned moles too, with twinkles or with amused, nose-tapping suggestiveness on my arrival and as I made the traditional preliminary inspection of cake-stand and bottle-stall. My parents’ gardeners were a pair of brothers called Alec and Ivan Tubby who battled to keep the tennis court — as well as the improbable pride of our garden, the badminton lawn — free of moles. Was there some connection there? Mole-catching is a great art and most practitioners (the fluorescent jacketed Rentokil variety always excepted) stand silently for great lengths of time staring at lawns and fresh molehills. After perhaps half an hour of this agonising inactivity they will at last make a move and pad softly towards apparently random places in the grass where they insert a number of traps. Over the next couple of days three or four dead moles will be pulled out. I suppose while they were standing doing nothing the mole-catchers were in fact reading tiny trembles in the earth, or patches of darker or lighter grass that gave them some suggestion as to where the moles were headed. The mole-hills themselves are not much of a clue of course once they’ve dug them, the gentlemen in black velvet move themselves off. The trick is to guess in which direction they have gone. Back in 1965, during the first weeks of my term at Cawston Primary School I had become more and more depressed about my inability to win a star for the Nature Table. Every week, we pupils in Miss Meddlar’s class would have to bring something in for a classroom display of biological objets trouvés. The prize exhibit would win a star. One week Mary Hench brought in a sandwich tern’s egg, taken from a nest on the coast at Brancaster. After Miss Meddlar had established in her own mind the truthfulness of Mary Hench’s assertion that the nest had been abandoned and the egg cold when happened upon (I didn’t believe Mary Hench for a second, I remain convinced to this day that the wicked girl had simply clapped her enormous hands and shooed away a sitting mother, so insane and diabolical was her ambition to win more stars than anyone else and the Junior Achievement Cup and five shilling book token that went with them) a star was awarded. I had entertained high hopes that week for my badger’s skull, boiled, vigorously scrubbed clean with Colgate toothpaste for a whiteness you can believe in and total fresh breath confidence, and attractively presented in a Queen’s Velvet envelope box packed with shredded red cellophane. I was to do the same dental cosmetic job on a less easily identifiable bone (I was sure that it was human) some years later, and win my third Blue Peter Badge — and a third Blue Peter Badge, as the world knows, is instantly converted into a Silver Blue Peter Badge. But all these happy achievements lay a long way ahead. For the moment, I was starless. But my blood was up. I was going to win a star and make Mary Hench howl with envy if I had to commit murder to do it. Glory never arrives through the front door. She sneaks in uninvited round the back or through an upstairs window while you are sleeping. Grim weeks of effort and nature-trailing followed. I tried a starfish, a thrush egg, a collection of pressed campions and harebells and a boxful of shards of that willow pattern ironstone china that the Victorians buried in the earth for the sole purpose of disappointing twentieth-century treasure seekers. None of these met with the least success. By the eighth week of term I knew that Nature Table Star List by heart. Mary Hench

31 Mary Hench Jacqueline Wright Ian Adams Jimmy Speed Mary Hench Mary Hench One Sunday evening, as I was wheeling round and round the stable block at home on my bicycle, racking my brains for an idea of what to offer up the next morning, Ivan Tubby approached me with something small and soft and dark cupped in his hands. ‘Found a mole,’ he said. This was not a mole that had been squashed and spiked in a gin-trap, it was a mole that seemed to have died very recently of natural causes. Perhaps its mother and father had been trapped and it had popped up to see what was going on and where dinner was and then discovered with a shock that it couldn’t see at all and in any case wasn’t supposed to be above the ground with the Up There people and the Seeing Animals. In whatever manner it met its end, this was a young mole in the most excellent condition, its pink snout and spreading shovel paws still warm and quite perfectly shaped. I begged to be allowed to keep him and Ivan generously consented, although as it happened he had marked him down as a treat for his cat. The next morning I bicycled down the mile-long lane to Cawston in a fever of excitement, the mole packed in straw in my saddlebag. This was to be my day of triumph. ‘Here we have a common European mole,’ I would tell the class, Pear’s Family Cyclopaedia having been thoroughly exhausted on the subject of moles the night before. ‘Moles eat their own weight every day and can actually starve to death within twelve hours if they don’t have enough food. A mole is capable of burrowing up to eighteen feet in one hour. Thank you.' I imagined executing a small bow and receiving delighted applause from all but a frustrated, white-lipped Mary Hench, whose feeble puss-moth caterpillar or pathetic arrangement of barn owl pellets would go unnoticed. I parked the bicycle and rushed to Miss Meddlar’s, slowing down as I arrived in the doorway, so as to look cool and casual. ‘Well now, you’re very early this morning, Stephen Fry.’ ‘Am I, Miss? Yes, Miss.’ ‘And what’s that you have there? Something for the nature table?’ ‘Yes, Miss. It’s a —‘ I started, excitedly. ‘Don’t tell me now, child. Wait until class. Put it on the table and.., well now whatever is going on?’ A violent explosion of giggles and screams could be heard coming from the playground. Miss Meddlar and I went to the window and tried to crane round and look towards the source of the uproar. Just then, Jimmy Speed, a chaotic, ink-stained boy, the kind who grins all the time as though he believes everyone to be quite mad, burst into the room. ‘Oh, Miss, Miss. You’ll never guess! You’ll never ever guess!’ ‘Guess what, Jimmy Speed?’ ‘That’s Mary Hench, Miss! She’s brought a donkey in for the nature table. A real live

32 donkey! Come out and see. That’s ever so beautiful, though how he will fit on the table, that I do not know.’ ‘A donkey!’ Miss Meddlar went pink with excitement, straightened her skirt and headed for the door. ‘A donkey. Good heavens!’ I looked down at my little mole and burst into tears. It was at the end of the week, just as everyone in the school was beginning to talk of things other than Mary Hench and her donkey, that Mr Kett came up to me in the playground and drew me aside. ‘Hello there, young man,’ he said. ‘You look a little down in the dumps if I might say so.’ ‘Do I, sir?’ ‘You do, sir,’ he said. ‘I remember a joke I heard as a boy in the pantomime. Cinderella. that was. In Dereham, years before the war. One of the ugly sisters, she said, “‘Whenever I’m down in the dumps, I buy myself a new hat.” And the other ugly sister replied, “So that’s where you get them from then.” I remember that as if it were yesterday.’ Only, said in his light Norfolk accent it came out as, '... I remember that as if it were yisty.’ ‘So,’ he went on, putting a hand on my shoulder. ‘What have you been getting down in those dumps?’ ‘Oh, nothing,’ I said, ‘only...’ ‘You can tell me, young man. If it’s a secret it won t go any further. A boy told me the most amazing secret twenty years ago. Do you know what it was?’ ‘No,’ I asked, perking up. There was nothing I loved better than a secret. ‘What was it?’ ‘I shan’t tell you,’ said Mr Kett. ‘It’s a secret. See? That’s how good I am at keeping them.’ ‘Oh. Well, you see, the thing is...’ And out spilled some kind of confused description of the disappointment, frustration, rage and despair that burned within me at being trumped by Mary Hench and her double- damned donkey. ‘It was a such a good mole, you see... so perfect. Its paws were perfect, its snout was perfect, its fur was perfect. It was the best mole ever. Even though it was dead. Any other week it would have won a star. And it’s not that stars are so important, it’s just that I’ve never won one for the nature table. Not once. Ever.’ ‘You’ve had plenty of stars for spelling though, haven’t you? So Miss Meddlar tells me.’ ‘Oh, spelling...’ ‘I had a look at your mole. It was a fine mole, there’s no question about it. You should be very proud of him.’ That afternoon, as class ended, I went to the nature table, took the creature, now slightly corrupted by time, and wrapped it in a handkerchief. ‘Is our mole leaving us?’ Miss Meddlar asked, with what seemed to be a gleam of hope in her voice. ‘I thought perhaps so,’ I sighed. ‘I mean, he is getting a bit.., you know.’

33 Halfway back home I leaned my bike against a hedge and opened the handkerchief, setting myself scientifically to examine the nature of decay. The body of the mole, once so plush and fine, now matted and patched, appeared to be alive with shiny white ticks. From out of the weeping centre of the carcass, a black insect that had been feasting deep in the wet ooze, seemed suddenly to see me, or at least to see daylight and its chance for freedom. Taking fierce wing with a fluttering clockwork buzz, it launched itself into my eye. I gave a scream and dropped the whole bundle. The flying creature, whatever it was, spun upwards into the air and across the fields. I felt a wetness around my ankles and looked down. The mole had fallen on to my sandals and exploded there, spreading itself all around my socks and feet. Squealing and shrieking in fright and revulsion, I hopped about flicking with the handkerchief at my shins as though they were on fire. It was too horrible, nature was too horrible. Nature stank and squelched and vomited with slime, maggots and bursting guts. I suppose this was the first time I had ever felt an urge not to be. Never an urge to die, far less an urge to put an end to myself — simply an urge not to be. This disgusting, hostile and unlovely world was not made for me, nor I for it. It was alien to me and I to it. Pieces of the mole lined the foot of the hedge. I rubbed a little at my legs with the once fine, crisp linen handkerchief and then I held it up to the sky. They were the same, the handkerchief and the evening sky. Both spattered with ink and blood. The alien malevolence of a certain kind of late afternoon sunset has frightened me ever since. ‘Good heavens, darling,’ my mother said. ‘Whatever is that smell?’ ‘Dead mole, what do you think?’ I said crossly as I stamped up the back stairs. ‘Well, you’d better go straight up and have a bath then.’ ‘What did you think I was doing? Going upstairs to ... to... play croquet?’ Not the best put-down ever, but as tart as I could manage. I didn’t think once about the nature table over the weekend. It had rained, which gave me a fine opportunity to stay indoors and ignore nature entirely. It was only as I bicycled in to school on Monday morning that I realised I had nothing at all for the weekly show and tell. A stick, I thought. I’ll jolly well take in a stick. If they don’t want moles, they can make do with a stick. Sticks can be interesting too. Nature isn’t all donkeys and otter spraints and tern’s eggs and coypu skulls and rotten crawling living things. I’ll bring in a dead stick. So I picked up the first stick I biked past. A very ordinary stick. Dead, but neutral and uncorrupted in its death. And useful too, which is more than you can say for a rotting mole dropping to bits all over your ankles. I brought the stick into the classroom and dumped it defiantly on the nature table. Well now,’ said Miss Meddlar, after she had exam-med the week’s crop with the irritating care and slowness of a pensioner paying at a checkout counter. ‘Now then, well. Another wonderful effort from you all. I have to say I half expected to see an elephant in the playground, Mary, but that is a lovely jay’s feather you’ve brought in for us, really lovely. But do you know what? The star this week is going to go to ... Stephen Fry.’ ‘Hurrh?’ A dozen pairs of disbelieving eyes swivelled between me, Miss Meddlar and the very ordinary dead stick that lay on the nature table like a very ordinary dead stick.

34 ‘Come you on forward, Stephen Fry.’ I came me on forward, bewildered. ‘This star is not for your stick, although I’m sure it is ever such a fine stick. This star is for you taking away your mole Friday...’ ‘Excuse me, Miss?’ '... because I have to say that the dratted thing was stinking out my classroom. He was stinking out the whole corridor, was your mole. I’ve never been so glad to see anything go in all my born days.’ The class erupted into noisy laughter and, since I was always, and have always been, determined that merriment should never be seen to be at my expense, I joined in and accepted my star with as much pleased dignity as I could muster. How strange then, how more than passing strange, to discover a quarter of a century later that it was this trivial episode that the school remembered me for, and not for my cold lies and sly evasions. John Kett was, still is I hope, a lay preacher and a better advertisement for Christianity than St Paul himself. Then again, in my unqualified opinion, Judas Iscariot, Nero and Count Dracula are all better advertisements for Christianity than St Paul ... but that’s a whole other candle for a whole other cake. You aren’t here to listen to my ignorant ramblings on the subject of theology. The awful thing is this. Until this day came twenty-five years on, with John Kett and others and their beaming mentions, I had entirely forgotten the mole and everything to do with it. At the start of the fete, every time moles had been knowingly alluded to as I Prince Michael of Kented my way from stall to stall, I had pretended that I knew what it was all about, but I was dissembling furiously. I imagined that people might be referring to some television sketch that I had been in and since forgotten all about. This often happens. I remember a few years ago being angrily yelled at from across the street by a complete stranger. Simply purple with fury this man was, shaking his fist and calling me a bastard pigging murderer. I assumed he was someone who didn’t like my politics, my television appearances, my sexual preferences, my manner, my voice, my face — me. It hardly mattered. He could call me a fat ugly unfunny lefty queer and I would see his point of view. But murderer? Maybe it was because I was wearing leather shoes... it is impossible to tell in these days of serial single issue fanatics. I wheeled round the corner and away. Such people are best avoided. One reads things, you know. You can imagine my consternation when I realised that this lunatic was dashing round the corner after me in hot pursuit. ‘Mr Fry! Mr Fry!’ I turned with what I hoped was a disarming smile, in reality seeking witnesses, policemen or an escape route. The lunatic was holding up an apologetic hand. ‘I suddenly saw that you didn’t know what on earth I was talking about,’ he said, scarlet with exertion and embarrassment. ‘Well, I must confess...’ ‘Speckled Jim!’ ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘You know, Speckled Jim!’

35 Said as if this would clear the matter up entirely. And then it had indeed dawned. This man was referring to an episode of a television series in which the character I played, General Melchett, court-martials the hero, Blackadder, for killing, roasting and eating Melchett’s favourite carrier pigeon, whose name was Speckled Jim. At one point during the court-martial, which Melchett rather unsportingly chairs himself, he refers to Captain Blackadder in a loud splutter of mad rage as ‘the Flanders pigeon-murderer’. That was the phrase this man had been shouting across the street. Not bastard pigging murderer at all... The strange thing about television is that you do it once and then forget about it, while some obsessed fans will watch programmes over and over again and end up knowing the scripts infinitely better than you ever did, even at the time of recording. Another trap for the unwary comic writer lies in using proper names in sketches. Like many writers I tend to use local placenames as fictional surnames and the surnames of people I know as fictional placenames. My assumption about the mole references then, had been that I had either appeared in some television programme with a mole, or that I had given the name ‘Cawston’ or possibly ‘Kett’ to such an animal. I racked my brains wondering what article I had ever written, or what commercial, sketch, sitcom, radio broadcast, film or play I had ever performed in that had even tangentially involved a mole: mole as small shovel-pawed mammal, mole as buried secret-agent, mole as drilling machinery, mole as unit of molecular weight, mole as melanoma or birthmark, I considered them all. Hugh Laurie and I had written a sketch about the kind of people who collect china plates with woodland voles on them, painted by internationally renowned artists and advertised in tabloid Sunday magazines. But it’s a far cry from a woodland vole to a dead mole, especially as the sketch hadn’t even been performed or recorded yet, let alone transmitted. So it was not until John Kett asked whether I still retained a keen interest in moles or if I had found any dead ones lately that the threads of memory pulled themselves together and I realised at last what everyone had been talking about. Not that they had kept mentioning this bloody mole because it was the most exciting animal to have hit Cawston since the Black Death, nor because it was the hero of an anecdote of any especial weight or interest in the life of the village. I realise now what I couldn’t have known then — that they mentioned it because they had a little surprise planned for me and it would have been embarrassing for everyone, myself included, if I had forgotten the whole affair and reacted to their presentation ceremony with dumb puzzlement. ‘Fancy you remembering the mole,’ I said to John Kett as he led me up to meet the man in charge of the sound system (every village has one microphone and tape-recording expert). Once the PA had been explained and I had been shown twice where the switch on the microphone was, I asked John Kett if he in turn ever remembered an occasion when I had not dared to go into his classroom to give him some test results from Miss Meddlar. He thought for a while and pulled an apologetic smile. ‘No, I’m afraid not,’ he said. In John Kett’s past the sun shines and birds sing, in mine there are banks of black thundercloud eternally forming over my head. I have on my lap as I type a rectangle of varnished wood, four holes neatly drilled into each corner for convenient hanging and display. It was the little surprise, my present from Cawston Village School, their thank-you to me for opening their fete.

36 In neat Olde English lettering, the following is written: Ode to a mole I didn’t ask to come here I didn’t ask to go But here I was And off I went With only a star for show Cawston ‘89 Grand Summer Fair 3 I left Cawston Village School in the March of 1965 and arrived at Stouts Hill the following month, -the only new boy of that summer term. Now it is September. Samuel Anthony Farlowe Bunce and a handful of others are the squits and the Stephen Fry who shouted ‘Miss, Miss!’ and giggled with the girls by the hopscotch court has died and in his place stands Fry, Fry, S. J., Young Fry, Fry Minor, Fry the Younger, Fry Secundus, Fry Junior or, worst of all, Small Fry. Stouts Hill, as I have described, was a mock castle, its stone turrets and battlements standing on a mound that rose up from the village of Uley in the shelter of the Bury. The school’s coat of arms sported a kingfisher, (reflecting perhaps both the school lake and the headmaster Robert Angus’s commitment to creating a halcyon youth for his young charges) beneath which on a scroll was written the school motto, Τοιςµελλουσι — to the future. The corpus studenti (since we’ve gone all classical) numbered just over a hundred, boys being divided into four Houses: Kingfishers, Otters, Wasps and Panthers. The dormitories were named after trees — Elm, Oak, Beech, Sycamore and Cypress. A nightly spoonful of Radio Malt, a halibut liver oil capsule on the breakfast spoon (later replaced by the more palatable sugar-coated Haliborange), tuition in a musical instrument, riding, sailing, gliding, cubbing, elocution lessons, scouting, shooting and photography all counted as Extras and were surcharged on the termly bill in guineas. Stouts Hill accepted no day boys and the exceptionally grand uniform, which included the most wondrous herringbone winter coat (as worn by my brother, and perched upon by a monkey, in the photograph section in the middle of this book), Aertex shirts for summer, Clydella for winter, a cap, a boater, a grey suit for High Days and Church, blazers, V- necks, ties, games shirts, games pullovers, shorts, snake belt in school colours (optional long trousers for those aged ten and over) and the most fantastical numbers of games socks, uniform socks and regulation elastic garters for the upkeep of same socks, was to be ordered by parents exclusively from Daniel Neale’s in Hanover Square and latterly, when Daniel Neale went out of business, from Gorringe’s in Kensington High Street. All clothing was to be clearly marked with the owner’s name — good business for Messrs

37 Cash and Company who had cornered the market in name-tapes in those days. The other essential item, naturally, was the tuck-box, the boy’s surname and initials to be printed in black upon the lid. Aside from the Angus girls, the female presence included Sister Pinder who had a Royal Naval husband, a magnificent wimple, starched cuffs and an upside-down watch of the kind included in the nurse’s outfits little girls always want for Christmas. Her preferred method of punishment when roused was a sharp slap with a metal ruler on the hand — far less painful than it sounds. Her son John was about my age and bound, if I remember rightly, for Pangbourne Naval College. For all I know he is an Admiral of the Fleet today, although if most of my school contemporaries are anything to go by he works in the City, in advertising, commercial property, the film business or as a happily indigent carpenter (at a pinch ceramic artist) in Cornwall. Such is my generation. As in the Carry On films there was a Matron as well as a Sister; on my arrival the incumbent was a Mrs Waterston, called Matey or Matey Bubbles after a nursery bath-foam of the same name. She also had a nephew at the school, though I fear I remember very little about him. Assistant Matrons came and went on the summer breeze and the only one I recall with any vividness was a bespectacled blonde girl called Marilyn (in my entirely unreliable memory an evangelical Christian) who played the guitar and would, when begged, lullaby my dormitory to sleep with a song inexplicably about (unless I have gone entirely mad) El Paso. Marilyn won the heart of my brother Roger on a walking tour in the Isle of Wight one summer holiday: he returned with a glass lighthouse filled with layers of different coloured sand from Ryde and a much larger Adam’s apple than he had left with. The symbolism of the lighthouse is the kind of hackneyed detail that only real life has the impertinence to throw up. The school secretary, Mrs Wall, wore nice tweed suits and had a pleasantly citrus and peppery smell. I believe she went by the name of Enid. The school Chef was called Ken Hunt and his egg or chicken dishes were the consequent victim of endless spooneristic jokes, which I am sure you don’t need to have spelled out for you. He had two kitchen porters, Celia, hugely fat, hairy and Spanish, by whom I was overwhelmingly mothered throughout my time at Stouts Hill and her husband Abiel, almost as hugely fat, Spanish and hairy as his wife and quite as generous to me. There was a butler called Mr Dealey, of whom I was greatly in awe. He wore trousers of the kind known as spongebag and seemed to have no other thing to say to me whenever we encountered each other than, ‘Now then, Master Fry, now then.’ I hear his almost spivvy tones again whenever I watch films like Hue and Cry and Laughter in Paradise, lying as they do somewhere between Jack Warner and Guy Middleton. He in turn had a brylcreemed son called Cohn with hair arranged in what I guess now was known as a rockabilly quiff. Colin helped about the place, could blow smoke-rings and whistle through his teeth to make a sound like a kazoo. He also held the tuck-shop key which made him greatly important. The school barber, John Owen, visited once a week and found my name amusing since it put him in mind of a famous auctioneer (famous auctioneer? Well, apparently so) called Frederick Fry. As he snipped away at my hair, Owen would repeat, again and again, ‘Frederick Fry FAT, Frederick Fry FAT. Fellow of the Auctioneers’ Institute, Frederick Fry, FAT.’ The Angus love of animals was reflected out of doors by a profusion of ponies and horses and an aviary which housed, amongst other exotic bird life, a most exquisite golden pheasant. Within doors there were birdcages too: these were actually built into the

38 walls near the headmaster’s study. They contained a pair of amiable parrots and my most particular friend, a mynah bird. This was a very prodigious animal which could imitate the school bell, Dealey mumbling to himself as he polished the candlesticks in the grand dining room the other side of the cages, the dull bang of the cane being thwacked on to tight trouser seats in the headmaster’s study and the voices of most of the staff; the bird was even capable of rendering exactly the sound of four crates of third-pint milk bottles being banged on to a Formica-topped trestle table, a sound it heard every day at morning break. It sounds an unlikely feat but I assure you I do not exaggerate. As a matter of fact I heard the broadcaster and naturalist Johnny Morris on the radio not so long ago talking about his mynah bird who could precisely mimic three pints being placed on a doorstep. The aural replication of milk delivery is clearly a common (if evolutionarily bewildering) gift amongst the domesticated mynahs of the West Country and a phenomenon into which more research cries out to be done. The Angus family owned dogs too of course. There was a large number of perpetually furious Boston terriers, a boxer called Brutus, something fluffy and loud called Caesar and a squadron of others, all belonging to old Mrs Angus who was warm and powdery and of whom I find it impossible to think without there coming into my head the image of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother. It was into her presence that my brother and I were ushered to be told of the death of our step-grandmother. I shall never forget the precise intonation she used when she told us. My grandfather’s third wife was Viennese and Jewish, like my real grandmother whom I never knew. She had been a friend of Stefan Zweig and Gustav Klimt and Arnold Schoenberg and all those grand Viennese café intellectuals. She used to let me use her typewriter whenever I visited her, which to me was the greatest joy in the world. I have been able to type proficiently since I was ten. Her maiden name was Grabscheidt, pronounced, I fear, grab-shite. There is still a huge cabin trunk somewhere in my parents' house on which is painted that wonderful name in great white letters. My brother and I had been to visit her in hospital when she was ill and she had been kind and told us not to be frightened by the tubes running into her nose. Later on, back at school, we had been summoned to see Mrs Angus. ‘You knew that your step-grandmother had been very ill,’ she said, stroking one of her dogs. My brother and I nodded. ‘I’m afraid I have just heard from your mother that she diddie...’ I don’t know why the emphasis of that intonation is with me still. Whenever I think of Auntie Claire, as we called her, (although I suppose her name must have been Klara or Klara or something similar) I remember that she did die. In the Easter holidays which fell between the end of my term at Cawston and the start of life away at what I thought of as Roger’s School, I had read from cover to cover, over and over again, the Stouts Hill School Magazine, which included a section entitled: LETTERS OF ENCOURAGEMENT TO A POSSIBLE NEW BOY I have that magazine in front of me now and reproduce the articles without amendment of any kind. Some of them I found I still knew almost by heart.





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




39 Tim Sangster We play cars down a little sort of dip. Jimmy King We have lots of fun playing cricket, tennis, rounders and swimming in the summer. In the winter we play football and rugger. On Sundays we usually watch television. We go to bed at six o’clock. You have lots of free time — the work is not to difficult. You can get gardens to grow things if you want to. You can sail too, if you want to join the sailing club. Anthony Macwhirter If you are in fourth game you sometimes go boating on the lake and swim every day in the summer if it is warm. On Sundays you may have three swims if you don’t go out. Edmund Wilkins It is very nice here because if you are in the country you have no one to play with, though at Stouts Hill there are lots of boys. In the summer we have swimming and boating and there is a half term holiday after the sports. If you are quite young you will go into the small form where you have potty work. We played Latin Football on Saturday which is great fun. Richard Coley There is a tuck shop only you are not allowed to bring tuck back. There are lots of butterflies to catch. There is a big lake with boats and oysters that clamp down on your fingers. Charles Matthews We have Cubs on Fridays, you wear your games clothes, its very hilly so we can do all sorts of things. When there is enough snow in winter we can go tobagganing which is super fun. Malcolm Black You can catch fish and row a boat if you want. Some boys like playing games like ‘Man Hunt’ or ‘Tip and Run.’ Most boys have a garden. In the summer baby frogs jump about. Sometimes there are Treasure Hunts up on the Bury. The Cubs go up into the woods and round about. They have their dens up in the woods. Donald Laing We have a museum and a model club as well. We have cellars, a changing room and three dining rooms. In the school we have five dormitories and two dormitories not in the school. The sentence in Edmund Wilkins’s article, ‘If you are quite young you will go into the small form where you have potty work’, haunted me for weeks before my arrival. The

40 idea that I might be considered, willy nilly, in need of ‘potty work’ simply terrified me. It is true that from time to time I wetted the bed at home —‘It’s not that I mind, darling. If only you would tell me. But when you pretend it never happened it just makes me so cross...’ — it was just that, in my fevered imagination ‘potty work’ meant grimmer, darker business than preventing piddling in the bed and I spent much of the holidays begging my mother to write letters to the school excusing me from this humiliation, which I saw as taking place on a grand daïs in front of the whole school. Nor was the next section in the magazine, some of which was the work of the same hands, calculated to set my mind entirely at ease. OUR FIRST DAYS AT STOUTS HILL J. Wynn When we got into the car to go to Stouts Hill for the first time I was very excited. They dropped me and drove away I was not homesick. The very first day I felt rather lost. We had our first ice-cream day and I thought we had to have the money on us. I bought two and put one in the waste-paper basket. I did not realise that I could have given it to someone else. A. McKane I had been ill in bed for about two weeks when I heard my parents were coming, this was on a Sunday. I was only just six years old. My parents and brothers came up to see me also my sister. When they left me I started to cry, so my sister stayed with me but later on, she went. My mother and father went to the school service to hear my brothers sing in the choir. By the side of my bed there was a bell which I could ring when I wanted something. At this time I was feeling very homesick, so I rang the bell as loudly as I could. I rang it for some time until I heard footsteps coming up the stairs and in rushed Jane. The whole school had heard it and I was rather ashamed. R. Maidlow At night time when I got into bed it was horrible because the bed was uncomfortable and the springs were to tight for me. The breakfast was a nice breakfast. The eggs were not to hard for me. My first game of cricket was a nice game of cricket and I hit some runs on my first game of cricket. T. Sangster When mummy had gone home in the car I met Doland and we explored and looked around. We went and looked in a shed beside the third game pavilion and then went and peered into the empty swimming pool. A bell rang and we wondered what it was for so we went up to the dormitory. Then somebody asked whether we had had tea. So we said ‘no’ and somebody brought us milk and buns. When we had eaten we all talked and read until Matron came in and said ‘No more talking’. And we went to sleep. Next day we went down to breakfast — I thought I was in IIB I stayed there for a lesson and then had to move into IIIB. In the middle of the lesson I arrived and sat down in the front row — I learned very little on the first morning. Then I went down to fourth game pitch and I was playing rounders —our side won by seven rounders. I was chosen about third but I did

41 not do very well. My first day in third cricket I was put as square leg but I could not stop a ball. I did not have an innings. Ian Hicks I was worried about the lessons and wondered if I would be hacked playing football and what the food would be like and whether I would get indigestion like I always did at home. Then how was mum in the car and had she got back all right. I went to bed and everybody asked me my name. Then the next morning the master came into lessons and said ‘Hicks, have you learnt to do History yet?” ‘Yes, a bit” came the reply. By lunch I had settled down. R. Coley My first night at school the thing I dreaded most was seeing mummy and daddy go down the drive. However I found another new boy named Povey. We walked around a bit till the tea bell rang and we went to tea. Everybody thought I was most peculiar because I had 3 cups of milk and slices of bread and 3 buns. M. Dolan At bed time we go to wash and go to bed. We are allowed to talk until 7 o’clock and we talk all the time. When we are closed down we talk lots of times and get caught and have to stand out for twenty minutes. Our legs get tired. I found myself dreading this strange world of ice-cream days and third game pavilions and being put as square leg. The idea that I might be asked if I had learnt to do History yet also filled me with horror. I knew plenty of history, thanks to my mother, herself a historian, and the endless quizzes I pestered her to give me as I followed her about the house, but I was certain that I hadn’t in any way ‘learnt to do History’. Another essay in the magazine puzzled me, puzzles me to this day. I felt it was getting at something, something awful to which it didn’t dare put a name. Ironic, given its title. “FEAR,” by S. Alexander Fear is the basis of cowardice and cowardice is the opposite to courage, but fear is not the opposite to courage. In many cases, fear is even the basis of courage and so it is an extraordinary thing. It gets complicated after that — the author presses Socrates and Douglas Bader into the argument and I get a trifle lost even now. I was more heartened by the following: WINNIE Winnie was a loveable little pony. She had a gentle temperament and liked having a fuss made of her. She was very old when she died. Everyone who rode her

42 will probably remember her for a long time. She was very persevering and would tolerate a tremendous amount of hitting around. I have never known her to lose her temper, so I think if there is a heaven, Winnie is there. Winnie passed into the next world on the afternoon of the 30th January. May she find rest in the endless pastures of Paradise. J. Bisset. I think I remember this Bisset. I believe he came from Rhodesia and had a younger brother who arrived at Stouts Hill at about the same time as me. The younger Bisset quite suddenly and inexplicably announced one term that he had changed his name to Tilney, something we all rather envied and I, personally, decided to emulate at once. I informed the master on duty that from now on I was to be referred to as Whatenough, Peregrine Ainsley Whatenough, but was told not to be an arse, which struck me as unfair. Looking back, one assumes the Bisset/Tilney name change was something to do with step- fatherage, a broken home and other things that were kept from us. Returning to the magazine, there follow endless pages cataloguing the achievements of old boys, with the usual depressing information as to their destinies. We were delighted to hear from Ian who is doing very well at Price Waterhouse and still plays squash regularly. John has done extremely well with an Agricultural firm dealing with machinery in Uganda. Adam Carter wrote to us from Gibraltar where he is stationed with the Somerset and Cornwall Light Infantry. No reunion or social gathering would be complete without Charles Hamilton. He looked splendid at the Berkeley Hunt Ball in his kilt. We hear Martin Wood is very happy at Stowe and is now a keen Beagler. Peter Presland goes up to London every day, where he is with a firm of solicitors, Bracewell and Leaver, where he specialises in commercial work during the day and at night is a libel “Expert” for a daily newspaper. I like the capitalised, double inverted-commas ‘Expert”, lending it a properly disreputable air. Of one old boy, later to become well known through marriage, we learn: Mark Phillips (1957-1962) Marlborough We were all delighted when Mark once again won at Badminton. ... the annual three-day eventing horse-trials, one assumes, not some ordinary game of shuttlecock and battledore...

43 Stouts Hill was a country school, this is the point that seems to emerge most from the magazines. London and all things urban were miles away. Whenever I picture myself at prep school, I picture myself out of doors: walking, sliding, tumbling, den-building, boating, fishing and in winter, sliding across the thickly iced lake, tobogganing and rolling snowballs down slopes until they grew to be the size of small vans. I remember being taught the names of wildflowers and birds, climbing trees, penetrating the woods and scaling the Bury. None of these activities came without pain. The pain began with bad luck over which I had no control but ended in a physical self-consciousness that has dominated my life ever since. The bad luck was principally asthma, a congenital condition inherited, I suppose, from my father who had spent a year in hospital as a child. I had joined the school’s tree climbing club and found to my surprise that a dread of heights did not prevent me from climbing trees quickly and without fear. Then, when I was nine, I developed a terrible allergy to whatever it is that lime trees put out in the summer, that same stuff that deposits its layer of sticky goo on the roofs of cars that are foolish enough to park in lime avenues. The result was two days in bed with my lungs wheezing like mouse-nibbled organ bellows. A number of boys at Stouts Hill had asthma, the Gloucestershire air was said to be good for them. One boy came for that very reason but made no improvement. He left for Switzerland after only five weeks, a five weeks spent with an inhaler constantly at his lips. The following term at morning prayers the headmaster reported his death to us and everyone turned to look at me. Later, at public school in particular, I became adept at using my asthma as an excuse for avoiding undesirable activities. I could induce attacks easily by burying my head inside dusty desks or in bushes and shrubs which I knew to be dangerous. I became intensely proud of my asthma, just as I was to become proud of my jewishness and proud of my sexuality. Taking an aggressively defiant stance on qualities in myself that others might judge to be weaknesses became one of my most distinctive character traits. Still is, I suppose. Seesawing with a friend one afternoon, I fractured the humerus bone of my left arm and went about in a sling for the rest of the term. Two days later my brother broke his arm in exactly the same place, a genuine coincidence. He had broken it in the field of battle, at rugger. I was the fool who could have avoided it, he was the brave soldier. As it later turned out, Roger had actually broken his arm by trying to pinch some food from the kitchen under the eye of Abiel, who had hurled him up some steps. In those days, things like that were hushed up. Poor Abiel hadn’t meant any harm, and a rugger injury looked better all round. I can’t separate out the connections, the causes and effects, but by my third year at Stouts Hill, after the onset of asthma and the breaking of my arm, I began to dread physical activity of almost any kind. I became prey to an acute sense of physical self- consciousness. This has sexual connections which we will come to later. In a prep school set in the country, in love with the country, inspired by the country and dedicated to the country, the boy who fears the country, fears it in all its manifestations, naturally becomes something of a loner: if his home-life is also spent in even deeper country he has a problem. The terror of the rotting mole and of the insects that gorge on dead flesh had never left me. I

44 was scared to distraction by the mere thought of silverfish and lice, maggots and blow- flies, puff-balls and exploding fungi. The malignancy and stench of death that hung over the forests, copses and lakeside woods at Stouts Hill expunged any pleasure I derived from the lively quickness of squirrels and badgers, from the gentle dignity of alders, larches, elms and oaks and from the delicate beauty of the herb robert, the campion, the harebell and the shepherd’s purse. More than that, the fearlessness of the other boys became itself something new to fear. That they could not see what was amiss with the world showed them to be strong and me to be weak. I was at the time, I think, unaware of all this at any conscious level worth bothering with. Other boys, after all, were what we would call today wimps. Some were wimpier than me by far. Some wore absurd spectacles with lenses an inch thick, others had spazzy walks and possessed eye—hand co-ordination that made me feel positively athletic. One boy was so afraid of horses that he would break out into a sweat if he came within twenty yards of the smallest pony. Two defects of mine did haunt me consciously however, and I cannot claim ever to have entirely exorcised myself of them. Natation first. The school had an excellent lake, in which some supervised swimming was allowed. There was a swimming-pool too, a most extraordinary white oval affair which might have been designed by Gropius, with an elaborate gravel filter for the water, which showed itself in the form of an endlessly playing fountain beside the pool. At either end was a bowl filled with a deep purple liquid into which one had to dip one’s feet before entry — something to do with verrucas I believe. If a boy had been officially witnessed to have swum two full unassisted lengths of the pool he was a Swimmer and entitled to wear blue swimming trunks and enjoy access to the deep end and the diving board. Non Swimmers wore red trunks and had to paddle in the shallow end holding preposterous polystyrene swimming aids sculpted into the shape of tombstones or, worse still, have inflatable water-wings sealed about their skinny arms. I was a non swimmer until my very last year. All my life I have never since bought a pair of red swimming trunks. At night, as others slept, I projected films in my head, films in which I swam like Johnny Weissmuller, Esther Williams and Captain Webb. Dipping, rolling and diving, head facing down into the surface of the water, I powered myself with easy, rhythmically pumping feet. I launched myself backwards and forwards, up and down the pool, head rising up to take one lungful of air for each length, while boys crowded round the pool, their mouths rounded in wonderment and admiration, watching me, praising me, cheering me on... I could do it, I knew I could do it then. It was clear to me that the achievement was all in the knowing. The only reason I couldn’t swim was that I had been told that I was a non swimmer. But there, on my hard-sprung Vono bed, while the others slept, I knew that I was an otter, a sea-lion, a leaping dolphin, Poseidon’s child, Marine Boy, the friend of Thetis and Triton, at one with water. If only they would let me wear blue trunks, then I would show them. The loud collision of detail, noise and hurry in the daytime confused everything and threw me off balance.

45 ‘Aren’t you changed, Fry?’ ‘Right, in you get.’ ‘Come on, boy!’ ‘It’s not cold, for God’s sake...’ ‘Legs! Legs, legs, legs! Get those legs working!’ ‘Get your head down. It’s water, it’s not going to bite you...' ‘What a spazz...’ The explosions of other boys laughing and bombing and belly flopping at the deep end turned into a distant mocking echo as the blood and fear flooded into me. ‘But I could do it last night!’ I wanted to shout. ‘You should have seen me last night. Like a salmon, I was... like a leaping salmon!’ Blue and shivering, I would push the polystyrene tombstone out before me, eyes screwed shut, head up so far that my neck bent backwards, thrashing myself forwards, my legs kicking up and down, panting and whooping with exertion and panic. Then I would rise, gasping and choking like a new born baby, twisted strings of snot streaming from my nose, chlorine burning my throat and eyes, sure that this time, this time, I had covered at least half the length of the pool. ‘Congratulations, Fry. One and a half yards.’ Hurrying across the grass, I would wrap myself in a towel, shivering and gulping with shame and exhaustion. The aching and the longing in me as I watched Laing silently glide underwater from end to end like a silver eel. He would break the surface without a ripple or a gasp, and then, laughing like a lord, backstroke, side-stroke and butterfly to the other end, rolling over and over as he swam, the water seeming to encase him in a silver envelope that glistened and pulsed like the birth sac of a gigantic insect. With my towel Balinese tight about my waist, I would, in Adam’s primal pudeur, perform the awkward ballet of swapping trunks for underpants, so absolutely, unconditionally and helplessly cast into black misery that nothing, not money, hugging, sweets, understanding, friendship or love, could have offered me the smallest sliver of joy or hope. The fierce knot of admiration, resentment, shame and fury that tightened in the pit of my stomach is one of those background sensations of childhood, like the taste of lemon sherbet or tomatoes on fried bread, flavours that can be blown back on the wind of memory or association to torture and now, of course, to amuse. Swimming was for me the closest a human being could come to flight. The freedom of it, the ease, the elegance, the delirious escape. Every living creature but Fry could swim. The tiniest tadpole, the most reluctant cat, the most primitive amoeba and the sim- plest daphnia. And I would never be able to do it, never. Never be able to join in, splashing and laughing and ducking and grabbing and roaring with the others. Never. Save in my mind. We talk of the callousness of the young. ‘Children can be so cruel,’ we say. But only those who are concerned with others can be cruel. Children are both careless and carefree in their connections with others. For one nine-year-old to think passingly about the non- swimming agonies of another would be ridiculous. There were contemporaries of mine at prep school who laboured and tortured themselves over their absolute failure to understand the rudiments of sentence structure: the nominative and accusative in Latin and Greek, the concept of an indirect object, the

46 ablative absolute and the sequence of tenses — these things kept them awake at night. There were others who tossed in insomniac misery because of their fatness, freckledness or squintedness. I don’t remember, I don’t remember because I didn’t care. Only my own agony mattered. Nothing prayed for — it is life’s strictest and least graceful rule — comes to you at the time of praying. Good things always come too late. I can swim now. I cannot recall how and when I passed my test and won those blue trunks. I know it did happen. I know that somehow I learned to doggy-paddle without the tombstone and the water-wings and that I completed my two compulsory lengths. I know too that I dis- covered how swimming was never going to be that fine, free soaring expansion of joy I had dreamt it would be. The pain of the red trunks, however, was as a minor aggravation, a teasing itch when compared to the blistering agony of Cong Prac. Stouts Hill never gave off an atmosphere of being any more or less religious than other schools I have known. It was with some surprise that I discovered not long ago that Robert Angus, the headmaster, had been a writer of deeply spiritual Christian poetry. Today, with the foul miasma of evangelism rising up to engulf us from every corner of God’s poor earth it is hard to remember that good Christian lives were once lived without words like ‘outreach’ and ‘salvation’ being dragged into general conversation. God was a dignified, generous, father and Christ his beautiful, liquid-eyed son: they loved you even when they saw you on the lavatory or caught you stealing sweets. That was Christianity, something quite unconnected to hymns, psalms, anthems and the liturgy of the church. In the 1960s Britain was just beginning to slither about in the horrid mess made by sacred music written especially for children — ‘Jonah’, ‘The Lord of the Dance’, ‘Morning Has Broken’ and all that preposterous rubbish. New tunes for ‘0 Jesus I have Promised’ were being composed, as music masters and idle, fatuous composers the length and breadth of the land were bothering us all with new carols and new settings for the Te Deum and Nunc Dimittis, some of them even ransacking the rhetoric of negro spirituals and American gospel songs, with results so nauseatingly embarrassing that I still blush to recall them. White, well-nourished British children who holidayed with their parents in old plantation houses in the Bahamas and Jamaica, clapping their hands, thumping tambourines and striking triangles to the lisped words of ‘Let my people go’ and ‘Nobody knows the trouble I see’, to a clash of cymbals and symbols that still harrows the imagination. But there, the very thought of music masters clapping their hands in rhythm and calling out ‘And one and two and three and ta-ta-ta-tab!!’ will always send the blood simmering to my head, never mind ethnic guilt and other associations. Every morning after breakfast at Stouts Hill, a bell rang for chapel, a service which involved no more than a perfunctory clutch of prayers, a lesson read by a prefect (hitting hard, in time honoured British fashion, the italicised words of the text of the Authorised Version as if they had been put there for emphasis) and a known hymn, but on Sundays there was held a proper service, with collects, psalms, canticles, versides, responses, anthems and a sermon. The choir dressed up in blue surplices and starched ruffs and processed with candles, the masters added the appropriate ermine or scarlet hoods to their gowns and we boys turned out in our best suits and tidiest hair, all checked up in the dormitories by Sister Pinder, Matron and a squad of sergeant-majorly prefects. Each

47 Sunday service, according to litany and season, had its own psalm, and Mr Hemuss, the music master, liked also to use Sundays as an opportunity to introduce us to hymns we had never sung before. This meant they had to be learned. After morning prayers on Saturday therefore we stayed behind in the’ chapel (actually a gymnasium with an altar) and Cong Prac was held — an abbreviation, though it never ever crossed my mind as such at the time, for Congregational Practice. Here the setting for the morrow s psalm and the tunes for the morrow’s unfamiliar hymns would be gone through, bar by bar. Saturday’s breakfast was always boiled eggs, and there is nothing so unpleasant in all this world as a roomful of human beings who have just eaten boiled eggs. Every fart and burp sulphurises the room with the most odious humming guff, a smell I can never smell to this day without returning to the hell of Gong Prac. I have just leaked all over you the feelings of longing and self-reproach that tortured me over my inability to swim. These feelings were as nothing, are as nothing, to what I felt and still feel about God’s cruelty, God’s malice, God’s unforgivable cruelty in denying me the gift of music. Music is the deepest of the arts and deep beneath all arts. So E. M. Forster wrote somewhere. If swimming suggested to me the idea of physical flight, then music suggested something much more. Music was a kind of penetration. Perhaps absorption is a less freighted word. The penetration or absorption of everything into itself. I don’t know if you have ever taken LSD, but when you do so the doors of perception, as Aldous Huxley, Jim Morrison and their adherents ceaselessly remind us, swing open wide. That is actually the sort of phrase, unless you are William Blake, that only makes sense when there is some LSD actually swimming about inside you. In the cold light of the cup of coffee and banana sandwich that are beside me now it appears to be nonsense, but I expect you know what it is taken to mean. LSD reveals the whatness of things, their quiddity, their essence. The wateriness of water is suddenly revealed to you, the carpetness of carpets, the woodness of wood, the yellowness of yellow, the fingernailness of fingernails, the allness of all, the nothingness of all, the allness of nothing. For me music gives access to every one of these essences of existence, but at a fraction of the social or financial cost of a drug and without the need to cry ‘Wow!’ all the time, which is one of LSD’s most distressing and least endearing side-effects. Other arts do this too, but other arts are for ever confined and anchored by reference. Sculptures are either figuratively representative or physically limited words by their material, which is actual and palpable. The words in poems are referential, they breathe with denotation and connotation, suggestion and semantics, coding and signing. Paint is real stuff and the matter of painting contains itself in a frame. Music, in the precision of its form and the mathematical tyranny of its laws, escapes into an eternity of abstraction and an absurd sublime that is everywhere and nowhere at once. The grunt of rosin-rubbed catgut, the saliva-bubble blast of a brass tube, the sweaty-fingered squeak on a guitar fret, all that physicality, all that clumsy ‘music-making’, all that grain of human performance, so messier than the artfully patinated pentimenti or self-conscious painterly mannerism of the sister arts, transcends itself at the moment of its happening, that moment when music actually becomes, as it makes the journey from the vibrating instrument, the vibrating hi- fl speaker, as it sends those vibrations across to the human tympanum and through to the inner ear and into the brain, where the mind is set to vibrate to frequencies of its own making.

48 The nothingness of music can be moulded by the mood of the listener into the most precise shapes or allowed to float as free as thought; music can follow the academic and theoretical pattern of its own modality or adhere to some narrative or dialectical programme imposed by a friend, a scholar or the composer himself. Music is everything and nothing. It is useless and no limit can be set on its use. Music takes me to places of illimitable sensual and insensate joy, accessing points of ecstasy that no angelic lover could ever locate, or plunging me into gibbering weeping hells of pain that no torturer could ever devise. Music makes me write this sort of maundering adolescent nonsense without embarrassment. Music is in fact the dog’s bollocks. Nothing else comes close. AND I CAN’T FUCKING DO IT I can’t so much as hum ‘Three Blind Mice’ without going off key. I can’t stick to the rhythm of ‘Onward Christian Soldiers’ without speeding up. I can’t fucking do it. Bollocks to Salieri and his precious, petulant whining. Maybe it is worse to be able to make music just a bit, but not as well as you would like to. I d love to find out. But I can’t fucking do it at all. To see friends gathering round a piano and singing ‘Always Look on the Bright Side of Life’, ‘Anything Goes’, ‘Yellow Submarine’, ‘Summertime’, ‘Der Erlkonig’, ‘She’ll Be Coming Round the Mountain’, ‘Edelweiss’, ‘Non Più Andrai’ — it doesn’t fucking matter what bloody song it is... I CAN’T FUCKING JOIN IN I have to mime at parties when everyone sings Happy Birthday ... mime or mumble and rumble and grow and grunt so deep that only moles, manta rays and mushrooms can hear me. I’m not even tone deaf, that’s the arse-mothering, fuck-nosed, bugger-sucking wank of the thing. I’M NOT EVEN TONE FUCKING DEAF I’m tone DUMB. The tunes are there in my head. There they are all right, perfect to the last quarter-tone of pitch and the last hemi-demi-semi-quaver of time. The ‘Haffner’, ‘Fernando’, the Siegfried motif, ‘Whole Lotta Love’, ‘Marche Militaire’, ‘Night and Day’, ‘The Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy’, ‘I Heard it Through the Grapevine’, ‘The Great Gate of Kiev’, ‘Lara’s Theme’, ‘Now Voyager’, ‘Remember You’re a Womble’, even the opening bars of Till bloody Eulenspiegel, I can play them all effortlessly in my head. Not just the tunes, but the harmonies too, the rhythmic patterns, everything. I find I can usually tell if a tune is in the keys of C minor, D major or E flat major, they are like

49 recognisable colours to me, not a stunning gift, but proof surely that I am not tone deaf. But between what is there in my head and what I can express with my voice or my fingers ... there falls a mighty and substantial shadow. ‘Oh, how does that tune from Bonanza go?’ someone will ask, and everybody will clutch their foreheads and screw up their faces as they try to force their memories. But there it is, the whole Bonanza theme in my head, fully armed, orchestrated entire, perfect to the last trill and triplet, every element complete and perfect, as if played inside me by the Vienna Philharmonic, led by Isaac Stern and conducted by Furtwangler. I can hear it as clearly in my head now as I can hear the mighty roar of King’s Lynn’s rush- minute traffic heading for Swaffham along the A47. ‘Go on, then, Stephen. If you can hear it, hum it...’ Ha! That’s a joke. Hum it. I might as well try to make a car engine out of spaghetti or a well-dressed man out of Martyn Lewis. If I try, if I really try to render it, to reproduce the concord of sweet sound that moves so perfectly in my head, the sound that emerges will shock and embarrass. I am looked at with reproach and faint disgust as if I’ve done something unpardonably tasteless and unbritish, like farting at the Queen Mother or kicking Alan Bennett in the balls. I’ve got a voice, haven’t I? A voice that can mimic accents, a voice with a fair repertoire of impressions and impersonations. Why can’t it express musical sounds as I hear them? Why this musical constipation? Why, oh Lord, why? And why so cross about it? I’ve covered a page with the most intemperate profanities and the most ungovernable rages on this subject, why does it upset me so much? Some people can’t walk, for Christ’s sake. Some people have severe dyslexia or cerebral palsy, and I’m whining about not having a gift for music. After all, what’s so bad about not being able to render a tune? ‘Come on, old fellow,’ the reasonable person might say, ‘we all know what the Mona Lisa looks like. We can all picture her in our heads, right down to the crazing on the varnish and the smokily shaded dimples at the side of her mouth. But which of us can doodle her? We don’t complain, we just shrug and say that we’re hopeless at drawing.., why can’t you say that about not being able to sing?’ Yeah, that’s all very well. But you see music is more than that. Music is social, music begins in dance. Music is actually about joining in. When I moan about swimming or about singing, I’m really moaning about not being able to join in. And I’m not really moaning, either. I’m trying to recapture an old misery and unravel it. There is a scene in one of my favourite films, Sidney Lumet’s 1988 Running On Empty, where River Phoenix (at his absolute coltish best) arrives at a new school with a new name (Manfield), a new history (made up) and hair dyed newly blond (dreamy). He and his family have spent their life running from the FBI — ‘on the lam’ as they say in America. We the film audience know, but Ed Crowley who plays the music teacher at this new school does not, that Phoenix’s character is an exceptionally gifted pianist. As Phoenix is welcomed into the music class, he sinks down into his seat and Crowley plays excerpts from two musical tapes, one a Madonna dance track, the other a classical string piece. ‘What’s the difference between these two pieces of music?’ asks Crowley. The class giggles. The difference is surely so obvious. ‘One is good and the other is bad?’ suggests a student.

50 What a sycophantic creep. We can see that most of the class find the Madonna much more fun than the classical. ‘That’s a matter of opinion surely,’ Crowley says to the sycophant. Phoenix, trained his whole life not to draw attention to himself, looks around the classroom. We know that he has an answer, but what can it be? What answer would you give, come to that, if asked to describe the difference between a Madonna track and a classical string quartet? Ed Crowley turns to this new student. ‘Mr Manfield?’ he asks. ‘Help us out. What do you think?’ There is a fraction of a pause as Phoenix twiddles shyly with his pencil before giving this reply. ‘You can’t dance to Beethoven?’ I like that. You can’t dance to Beethoven. And if you can’t dance, you can’t join in. Music from the ‘ragtime and jazz tradition’ (why do I feel that the word Tradition is taking on the greasiness of the word Community? The ‘gay community’, ‘the divided communities of Northern Ireland’ — the ‘Gospel tradition’, the ‘folk tradition’) all the way through to blues, R&B, rock and roll, soul, funk, reggae, pop, ska, disco, rap, hip- hop, techno, acid-house, jungle, Tesco, handbag, trance, hypno and the rest, always keeps its back-beat and its dance roots; its proper home is still the dance floor and the shared experience of adolescents swapping records in their bedrooms. It is public music, it publicly defines an age, it is still dance, now in fact, since the high days of folk-rock and hard rock, it is more than ever dance. When two or three gather together and hear ‘Blockbuster’, ‘Blowin in the Wind’, ‘The Piper at the Gates of Dawn’, ‘Maxwell’s Silver Hammer’, ‘Come on Eileen’ or ‘Relax’, there is that other dance to be danced, the generational dance in which listeners are united in their decade, the age they were at the time of the music’s release, the ridiculous trousers they wore, the television programmes they watched, the sweets they bought, the hi-fl set-up they spent weeks arranging and rearranging in their bedroom, the girls and boys they thought of as the love-lyrics and guitar licks pounded into them. To earlier generations ‘Are You Lonesome Tonight?’, ‘A-tisket, a-tasket’, ‘We’ll Meet Again’ and Glenn Miller’s ‘Moonlight Serenade’ might perform the same office. Those same people who, listening to the Andrews Sisters’ ‘Boogie-Woogie Bugle Boy’ will shriek, ‘Oh, that takes me back to my very first dance! My very first nylons! My very first Alvis motorcar!’ will have been young and bouncy when Britten wrote The Turn of the Screw or when Walton produced Belshazzar’s Feast, but you won’t hear them squeal with the delight of public reminiscence and the memory of first snogs and first lipsticks when the ‘Sea Interlude’ from Peter Grimes floats over the airwaves. Classical music is private art, stripped of that kind of association. That, partly, is why classical music is also very nerdy. Its decontextualised abstractions take the classical music lover and the classical music practitioner out of the social stream and into their own heads, as do chess and maths and other nerdile pursuits. Mussorgsky’s ‘Night on the Bare Mountain’ is not nerdy however, when it makes everyone brighten up and do their whispering impression of the slogan for that cassette tape TV commercial: ‘Maxell! Break the sound barrier...’

51 Classical music can be ‘rescued’ therefore from the void of abstract nerdaciousness by association with film, television and advertising, so that Beethoven can make you think of power generation companies, Mozart of Elvira Madigan and Trading Places, Carl Orff of Old Spice aftershave and so on, and no doubt our own contemporary composers Philip Glass, Gorecki, and, God help us all, Michael Nyman, will be similarly pressed into service by Laboratoires Gamier and Kellogg’s Frosties before the century is out. It is customary for those who like classical music to damn the advertising industry and the producers of commercials and TV programmes for vulgarising their beloved music. If you can’t hear ‘Eine Kleine Nachtmusik’, they say, without thinking of Robert Robinson and Brain of Britain, or Mozart’s ‘Musical Joke’ without Hickstead and the Horse of the Year Show galloping through your head, then you’re a philistine. Well that’s just the arse’s arse. The same snobbery is being applied now to pop music and we are starting to hear complaints about the Kinks being yoked to the Yellow Pages and John Lee Hooker turning into a lager salesman. There is simply no limit to the tyrannical snobbery that otherwise decent people can descend into when it comes to music. Hugh Laurie made me laugh for a week early on in our friendship when he re-enacted the youthful party scene in which some nameless figure will approach a stack of records next to the hi-fl, go through them one by one and then say, his brow wrinkled with cool, sour disfavour, ‘Haven’t you got any decent music then?’ The mirror-shaded NME journalists have no idea how close they are to the opera queen, the balletomane and the symphonic reviewer for Gramophone magazine. They are sisters under the skin. Cysts under the skin more like. The tribal belonging, the sexual association, the sense of party — these are what popular music offer, and they have always been exclusion zones for me. Partly because of my musical constipation — can’t dance, can’t join in the chorus — partly because of my sexise of physical self, feeling a fool, tall, uncoordinated and gangly. On the other hand I’m not Bernard Levin. I am not in love with the world of classical music or set upon the intellectual, personal or aesthetic path of a private relationship with Schubert, Wagner, Brahms or Berg. Nor am I a Ned Sherrin, devoted to the musical, to Tin Pan Alley and twentieth-century song. I did well professionally first crack out of the box with a stage musical, but musicals don’t mean much to me. I am not a show girl I fear. There is no proper way for me to express what music does to me without my sounding precious, pretentious, overemotional, sentimental, self-indulgent and absurd. No proper way therefore to express either what it has done to me over the years to know that I would never be able to make music of even the most basic kind. I would like to dance. Not professionally, just when everyone else does. I would like to sing. Not professionally, just when everyone else does. I’d like to join in, you see. Guilty feet, as George Michael tells us, have got no rhythm. I can play... I mean, as an effort of will I can sit down and learn a piece at the piano and reproduce it, so that those who hear will not necessarily move away with their hands clutched to their mouths, vomit leaking though fingers, blood dripping from ears. Then of course, a piano needs no real-time tuning. I strike middle C and I know that middle C will come out. Were I to try and learn a stringed or brass instrument that needed me to make

52 the notes as I played, then I hate to think what might be the result. Playing the piano is not the same as making music. None of this is important in itself, but I feel somewhere that it has a lot to do with why I have always felt separate, why I have always felt unable to join in, to let go, to become part of the tribe, why I have always sniped or joked from the sidelines, why I have never, ever, lost my overwhelmingly self-conscious self-consciousness. It’s not all bad. Heightened self-consciousness, apartness, an inability to join in, physical shame and self-loathing — they are not all bad. Those devils have also been my angels. Without them I would never have disappeared into language, literature, the mind, laughter and all the mad intensities that made and unmade me. Singing began for me; as it does for most of us, in a communal form. Whether it is ‘All Things Bright and Beautiful’, ‘Little Bo-Peep’, ‘Away in a Manger’ or ‘Thank You For the Food We Eat’ that is how children first raise their voices in music. I joined in like every other child and never thought much about it until prep school and Congregational Practice. It was the custom of prefects to patrol the pews during Cong Prac and make sure that everyone was paying attention and doing his best to join in. One Saturday, perhaps my third or fourth week at Stouts Hill, Hemuss the music master had selected the hymn ‘Jerusalem the Golden’ for the next day’s service. We had never sung it before. Don’t know if you re familiar with it — it’s very beautiful, but not easy. Lots of unusually flattened notes and set in a subtle rhythm that seems a world away from the simple tumpty-tum of ‘Onward Christian Soldiers’ which is a hymn any old fool can speak-sing without drawing too much attention to himself. We listened to Hemuss playing this new tune through on the piano a few times then, as usual, the choir had a stab on their own. Next came our turn. I wasn’t really thinking of much, just joining in aimlessly, when I became aware of a prefect, Kirk, standing next to me. He pushed his face right up to mine, his ear against my mouth and then called out in a loud voice. ‘Sir, Fry’s mucking about!’ The boiling flood that rose to my face then is rising again now. It is of that heat and fever that can only be caused by injustice — rank, wicked, obscene, unpardonable injustice. Hemuss stopped playing, a hundred voices trailed off into silence, a hundred faces turned to look at me. ‘On your own then, Fry,’ said Hemuss, ‘and two and three and...’ And... ... silence. My mouth rounded in the shape of the words, a small husky breath may or may not have hissed from my throat, but the school heard nothing and saw nothing, save a crimson straining face and eyes screwed shut in shame. ‘This isn’t a game, Fry! And two, three and...’ This time I tried. I really tried. Words did emerge. I had got no further than’... with milk and honey blest’ before, within seconds of each other, Hemuss stopped playing, Kirk hissed, ‘God you’re completely flat!’ and the whole hall exploded with hooting, braying laughter.

53 Since that time I have been to weddings and to the funerals of deeply loved friends and been entirely unable to do anything but mime the words of the hymns I have so desperately wanted to sing. I have felt guilty for paying nothing but literal lip service to those for whom I care. Since I have a certain facility with words and with performance I am often asked to give speeches on such occasions and this I can manage. But I don’t want that. All I have ever wanted is to be part of the chorus, to be able to join in. Is that true? I’ve just written it, but is it true? An odd thing is this. I had no memory at all of the Cong Prac hooting braying incident until I went to see a hypnotist nearly twenty years later. Oh, hello.., a hypnotist now, is it? Actually, this was a completely practical visit to a hypnotist. Hugh Laurie and I used to write and perform material of a more or less comedic nature in a 1980s Channel 4 comedy and music show called Saturday Live. It was the programme that notably launched Ben Elton and Harry Enfield into public fame. ‘One week Hugh and I had some sketch or other which involved an ending in which I needed to sing. Not a complicated song, some sort of R&B verse, nothing more. Harry Enfield was to conduct a band wearing amusing headphones and a pleasing Ronnie Hazlehurst grin and Hugh, I suppose, was to play the guitar or piano. I can’t remember why I had to sing and why Hugh couldn’t have looked after the vocal department as he usually did. Perhaps he had a mouth organ to deal with too. Hugh can sing splendidly, and play any musical instrument you throw at him, the son of a son of a son of a son of a son of a bitch. I said to Hugh, as I say to everyone who will listen, ‘But this is mad! You know I can’t sing...’ Hugh, either out of exasperation or a cunningly laid plan to force me to wrestle my musical demons to the ground, said that I would just plain have to and that was that. I suppose this would have been a Wednesday: the programme, as the title suggested, was transmitted live on Saturday evenings. By Thursday morning I was all but a puddle on the floor. How could I possibly sing live on television? The problem was, even if I spoke the lines, I wouldn’t be able to do so in rhythm. The musical intro would begin and I would be unable to come in on the right beat of the right bar. The very oddity of my performance would detract from the point of the sketch. The whole thing would become a number about a person making an appalling noise for no apparent reason. Many people get stage fright: the moment they have to speak or act in public their voices tighten, their legs wobble and the saliva turns to alum powder in their mouths. That doesn’t happen to me with speech, only with music. Alone or in the shower, I can soap myself in strict tempo if there is music playing on my Sony Bathmaster. But if I think so much as a house-fly is eavesdropping, everything goes hot, bothered and bastardly: I lose the ability even to count the number of beats to a bar. It occurred to me, therefore, the Thursday prior to this programme, that a hypnotist might perhaps be able somehow to cure me of this self-consciousness and allow me to kid myself, when the moment came round on Saturday in front of cameras and studio audience, that I was alone and unwitnessed.

54 The more I thought about it, the more logical it seemed. A hypnotist couldn’t turn me into Mozart or Muddy Waters, but he might be able to remove the psychological obstacles that froze me whenever music and I met in public. I let my fingers do the initial walking and then followed them all the way to Maddox Street, W1 where a hypnotherapist calling himself Michael Joseph had a little surgery. He came complete with a soothing manner and a most reassuring Hungarian voice. The matey, disc-jockey tones of a Paul McKenna would have sent me scuttling, but a rich middle-European accent seemed just what was required. Aside from anything else, it reminded me of my grandfather. I explained the nature of my problem. ‘I see,’ said Mr Joseph, folding his hands together, like Sherlock Holmes at the commencement of a consultancy. ‘And what is dee ... how you say? ... dee cue that comes before you must start singing for diss programme?’ I had to explain that the words that immediately preceded my singing were in fact ‘Hit it, bitch...’ ‘So. Your friend, he is saying “Hit it, bitch"... and next music is starting and you must be singing? Yes?’ ‘Yes.’ The business of being put in a trance seemed childishly simple and disappointingly banal. No pocket watches were swung before me, no mood music or whale song played in the background, no mesmeric eyes bored into my soul. I was simply told to put my hands on my knees and to feel the palms melt down into the flesh of the knees. After a short time it became impossible to feel what was hand and what was knee, while miles away in the distance rich, sonorous Hungarian tones told me how pleasantly relaxed I was beginning to feel and how leaden and heavy my eyelids had become. It was a little like being lowered down a well, with the hypnotist’s voice as the rope that kept me from any feeling of abandonment or panic. Once I was in what I might as well call a trance, I was asked for all memories and thoughts connected to singing. It was at this point that every detail of Kirk and the humiliation that attended my attempt at a solo ‘Jerusalem the Golden’ flooded unbidden into my mind. So that was it! That was what had been holding me back all these years. A memory of childish public humiliation that had convinced me that I never could and never would sing in public. The hypnotist’s voice, at once both far away and incredibly close, made the suggestion that when I heard the words ‘Hit it, bitch...’ I would feel totally relaxed and confident, as if alone in the bath, unjudged, unselfconscious and unembarrassed. I would sing the verse I had to sing on Saturday lustily, forcefully, amusingly and with all the relish, gusto and self-pleasure of a group of Welshmen in the back seat of a rugby coach. Not his simile, but that is what he meant. I assimilated this suggestion and made a strange, echoey interior note to myself that it was all quite true and that it was absurd that Saturday’s gig had ever held any terrors for me, while my voice murmured assent. After counting me backwards into consciousness and telling me how refreshed and splendid I would feel for the rest of the day, the hypnotist tried to sell me the inevitable Smoking, Dieting and Insomnia tapes that lined his bookshelves and sent me on my way,





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




55 my wallet lighter by fifty or so pounds and my heart by a million kilos. My performance that Saturday will never be counted alongside Marilyn Horne’s début at the Met or the release of Imagine, but I did get through it without a blush of self- consciousness or a tinge of fear. It was only afterwards, winding down as usual in the Zanzibar, the early pre-Groucho watering-hole of choice amongst 1980s comedians, photographers, artists and the like, that it occurred to me that the bloody man had only released me from my singing burden for that one single occasion. ‘Hit it, bitch .. .‘ had been my trigger and this one Saturday night the moment of its activation. He had not freed me of my musical inhibitions permanently. The talisman’s power had been all used up and if I wanted to sing again in public I would have to make another sodding appointment. There and then, in the vodka and cocaine fuelled passion of the moment, I made a vow never to do so. Singing and Stephen were not meant to be. I am grateful to him for allowing me access to a forgotten memory, but it is not a path I have any desire to travel down again. I dare say there are other memories hidden away in the tangled briar-bush of my head, but I see no earthly reason to start hacking away there. Music matters to me desperately, I’ve made that clear, and I could cover pages and pages with my thoughts about Wagner and Mozart and Schubert and Strauss and all the rest of it, but in this book my passion for music and my inability to express it in musical terms stand really as symbols for the sense of separateness and apartness I have always felt. In fact they stand too as a symbol of love and my inability to express love as it should be expressed. I have always wanted to be able to express music and love and the things that I have felt in their own proper language — not like this, not like this with the procession of particular English verbs, adjectives, adverbs, nouns and prepositions that rolls before you now towards this full-stop and the coming paragraph of yet more words. You see, when it comes down to it, I sometimes believe that words are all I have. I am not actually sure that I am capable of thought, let alone feeling, except through language. There is an old complaint: How can I tell you what I think until I’ve heard what I’m going to say? It might have been designed for me, that question. It was years before Oscar Wilde was to shake me out of a feeling that this was a failure in me, when I read his essay, written in the form of a Platonic dialogue, The Critic As Artist: ERNEST: Even you must admit that it is much more difficult to do a thing than to talk about it. GILBERT: More difficult to do a thing than to talk about it? Not at all. That is a gross popular error. It is very much more difficult to talk about a thing than to do it. In the sphere of actual life that is of course obvious. Anybody can make history. Only a great man can write it. There is no mode of action, no form of emotion, that we do not share with the lower animals. It is only by language that we rise above them, or above each other — by language, which is the parent, not the child, of thought. (My italics, Mrs Edwards, my italics)

56 Language was all that I could do, but it never, I felt, came close to a dance or a song or a gliding through water. Language could serve as a weapon, a shield and a disguise, it had many strengths. It could bully, cajole, deceive, wheedle and intimidate. Sometimes it could even delight, amuse, charm, seduce and endear, but always as a solo turn, never a dance. Swimming turned out, when I did it, to be simply the ability to move forwards in water. When I did learn to play pieces on the piano, I discovered that I did not fly or approach any penetration of the cosmos. Language, I had to confess to myself, did get me places. It got me academic success, and later financial and worldly rewards that I could never have dreamed of. I learned to use it to save me from bullying, mockery and rejection. Language went on to give me the chance to do things that I am pleased to have done. I have no reason to complain about language. Others, however, had much to complain about in me, so far as my language was concerned. They could not understand it. During my first term at Stouts Hill I found it almost impossible to make myself understood. It drove me insane: I would say things perfectly plainly and always receive the same reply —‘What? Hng? What’s the boy saying?’ Was everybody deaf? My problem was eventually diagnosed by a keen-eared master. I was speaking too quickly, far too quickly; I talked at a rate that made me unintelligible to all but myself. The words and thoughts tumbled from my mouth in an entirely pauseless profusion. For example, ‘Sir, is it really true that there are no snakes in Ireland, sir?’ would emerge as something like ‘Sriseel-troosnayxironss?’ I heard myself plainly and was most hurt and offended when the same insulting word was thrown back at me again and again. ‘Don’t gabble, boy.’ A solution was found by the school in the endearingly Margaret Rutherford form of an extraordinary old lady bedecked with amber beads, lavender water, wispy hair and a Diploma in the Science of Elocution. Every Wednesday and Friday she drove from Cheltenham to Uley in a car that looked like a gigantic Bayswater pram and trained me for an hour in the art of Diction. She would sit patiently at a table and say to me, dipping her head up from the table and blinking her eyelids with astonishing rapidity as she did so: ‘And turn it down! And turn it down!’ I would obediently repeat, ‘Annidern, annidern.’ ‘No, dear. “And-ah, turn-ah, it-ah, down-nn!” You see?’ ‘And-ah, turn-ah, it-ah, down-nn?’ ‘I do not want you to say “and-ah, turn-ah”, my dear. I want you to be aware that the “d” at the end of the “and” must not run into the “t” at the beginning of “turn”, do you see? And. Say “and” for me. ‘And.’ Did she think I was a baby? ‘Good. Now “Turn”.’ ‘Turn.’ ‘And turn.’

57 ‘Anturn.’ ‘And-ah turn!’ ‘And-ah turn!’ Poor woman, she did get there in the end. She introduced me to the pleasure of hearing a progression of plosive and dental consonants — the sheer physical delight to be derived from the sounds and the sensations of the tongue on the teeth — by teaching me the tale of that extraordinarily persevering and stupid woman called Elizabeth, whose Shrove Tuesday misadventures with rancid butter teach us all how by striving, we might turn disaster into triumph. The story went like this. ‘Betty had a bit of bitter butter and put it in her batter and made her batter bitter. Then Betty put a bit of better butter in her bitter batter and made her bitter batter better.' From there we moved on to ‘She stood at the door of Burgess’s fish sauce shop, welcoming them in.’ The standing at the door was fine — piece of piss —but the welcoming of them in nearly turned my tonsils inside out. ‘Yes, perhaps that one is too difficult for you, dear.’ Too difficult? For me? Ha! I’d show her. Hours I spent one weekend mastering the art of welcoming them in. At the next lesson I enunciated it like Leslie Howard on benzedrine. ‘Very nice, dear. Now I should like you to say: “She stood at the door of Burgess’s fish sauce shop, welcoming him in.”’ Aaaaagh! Disaster. I made a great run for it and fell to the ground in a welter of ‘mimming’ and ‘imimming’, my larynx as tangled as a plate of spaghetti. ‘You see, my dear, I am not interested in you learning these sentences as if they were tongue twisters. I want you to try and feel how to talk. I want you to allow the words to come one after the other. I think you like to compress them all into one bunch. Your mind races ahead of your tongue. I would like your tongue to see the words ahead, each one a little flower on the wayside, that can only be picked up as you pass. Don’t try to snatch at a flower before you have reached it.’ I wriggled in my seat at the soppiness of the image, but it did clarify things for me. Before long I was even able to tell the strange story of the blacksmith’s mother who wants to know just what her son thinks he’s up to with that set of saucepans: ‘Are you copper-bottoming ‘em, my man?’ ‘No. I’m aluminiuming ‘em, mum.’ I was able to say: the seething sea ceaseth, and thus sufficeth us, and able to imagine an imaginary menagerie manager, managing an imaginary menagerie. But many an anemone has an enemy, and her enemy was pace. ‘This is not a fifty-yard dash, my dear. I want you to love every single movement of your tongue and lips and teeth. Every single movement of your tongue and lips and teeth. What is it that I want you to love?’ ‘Ev-ery single movement of my tongue and lips and teeth.’ ‘Ev’ry, dear, not ev-ery. We do not wish, after all, to sound foreign. But you said there “tongue and lips and teeth”. A few weeks ago you would have said “tung-nips-n- teeth”, wouldn’t you?’ I nodded. ‘And now you know our wonderful secret. How beautiful it is to hear every single

58 movement of your tongue and lips and teeth.’ We moved on from John Masefield’s ‘Cargoes’ to Alfred Tennyson’s ‘Blow Bugle Blow’ and within a term I was comprehensible to all. Like those foreigners in adventure stories who would come out with Caramba! Zut! and Himmel! when excited, I was still likely to revert to rushing streams of Stephenese at moments of high passion, but essentially I was cured. But something wonderful and new had happened to me, something much more glorious than simply being understood. I had discovered the beauty of speech. Suddenly I had an endless supply of toys: words. Meaningless phatic utterance for its own sake would become my equivalent of a Winnie the Pooh hum, my music. In the holidays I would torment my poor mother for hours in the car by saying over and over again ‘My name is Gwendoline Bruce Snetterton. Gwendoline Bruce Snetterton. Snetterton. Snetterton. Snetterton.’ Ignoring the gender implications of such a name choice, which are not our concern just now, these were the only songs that I could sing. It was the journey from consonant to vowel, the tripping rhythm, the texture that delighted me. As others get tunes on their brain, I get words or phrases on the brain. I will awaken, for example, with the sentence, ‘Hoversmack tender estimate’ on my lips. I will say it in the shower, while I wait for the kettle to boil, and as I open the morning post. Sometimes it will be with me all day. I was immensely put out, incidentally, when a few years later Monty Python used the name Vince Snetterton in one of their sketches. Snetterton is a village in Norfolk, and I felt that they had stolen it from me. From that day forward, Gwendoline Bruce Snetterton ceased to be. Language was something more than power then, it was more than my only resource in a world of tribal shouts and athleticism and them, the swimmers and singers, it was also a private gem collection, a sweet shop, a treasure chest. But in a culture like ours, language is exclusive, not inclusive. Those on easy terms with words are distrusted. I was always encouraged to believe that cleverness and elegance with words obscured and twisted decent truth: Britain’s idea of a golden mean was (and still is) healthy inarticulacy. Mean, certainly — but golden? Leaden, I think. To the healthy English mind (a phenomenon we will dwell on later) there is something intellectually spivvy, something flash, something jewy about verbal facility. George Steiner, Jonathan Miller, Frederic Raphael, Will Self, Ben Elton even.., how often that damning word clever is attached to them, hurled at them like an inky dart by the snowy-haired, lobster-faced, Garrick Club buffoons of the Sunday Telegraph and the Spectator. As usual, I scamper ahead of myself. 4 When I was a prep-school master at Cundall Manor School in North Yorkshire, eleven or twelve years after arriving at Stouts Hill (note the dashing blazer in the photograph and wonder that this man was allowed to live) the boys at my breakfast table liked me to tell them over and over again the story of Bunce and the Village Shop. I think it gave them a kick to know that a teacher could once have been Bad — not just naughty, but Bad, really Bad.

59 Discipline at Stouts Hill, for all that I have correctly described the place as familial, friendly and warm, was tough, or what would be called tough today. It centred more or less entirely around the cane: the whack as it was called by masters, matrons and boys. ‘You get caught doing that, you’ll get the whack a friend might say with lip- smacking relish. ‘Right, Fry, if- you’re not in bed in ten seconds flat, it’ll be the whack for you,’ the master-on-duty would warn. ‘How many times have you had the whack this week, Fry?’ I would be asked in wonderment. The headmaster when I arrived at Stouts Hill was still the school’s founder, Robert Angus. He kept a collection of whippy bamboo canes behind the shutters of his study and they were used with great regularity, most especially during the feared Health Week, a time when he made it plain that his arms and shoulders craved exercise and would look for the slenderest excuses to find it. During Health Week an infraction of the rules that would usually have resulted in lines or detention would be upgraded to the whack. A crime ordinarily punishable by three strokes would be dealt with by six, and so on. If Health Week was to be feared, far more terrifying were those occasions when Angus was unwell or away and the deputy headmaster, Mid Kemp, took over the running of the school and the administration of physical punishment. Mid, I was disconsolate to find out while researching for this book, was short for Middleton. I had spent the whole of my life up until now convinced that it was an abbreviation for Midfred, which would have suited the man better. In my memory Mid Kemp’s hands, his patched tweed jackets, his moustache and his hair were all yellowed with nicotine. I don’t know what it is about modern cigarettes, but no longer does one see the great stained smoking fingers and egg-yolk streaked white hair of old. Mid Kemp looked and talked like C. Aubrey Smith in The Four Feathers. His favourite word, one for which I have a great deal of time myself as a matter of fact, was Arse. Everyone was more or less an arse most of the time, but I was arsier than just about everyone else in the school. In fact, in my case he would often go further — I was on many occasions a bumptious arse. Before I learned what bumptious actually meant I assumed that it derived from ‘bum’ and believed therefore with great pride that as a bumptious arse I was doubly arsey — twice the arse of ordinary arses. When umpiring cricket matches, Mid Kemp treated his own arse to the bracing leather comforts of a shooting stick and would perch at square leg in a yellow haze of nicotine that spread from short midwicket to deep fine leg. Mid Kemp treated boys’ arses, on those occasions when Angus was away, to the most ferocious cuts of the cane. Instead of the straightforward thwack, his speciality was the bacon-slicer, a vertical downwards slash requiring far less effort and inflicting infinitely more pain than the conventional horizontal swat. Early in my time at Stouts Hill he was replaced as deputy headmaster by Angus’s son-in-law, A. J. Cromie, an alumnus of Trinity College Dublin who bore a ferocious moustache and terrified me more than he could ever have known. Cromie drove a spectacularly beautiful blue Rolls Royce, wore (in my memory at least) green Irish thornproof tweeds and taught me French in an accent which, young as I may have been, I suspected to be far from authentically Gallic. Angus in his day beat me many times, always with gentle sorrow. Mid Kemp sliced

60 me from time to time with a rather mad, rather frightening glazed boredom. Cromie beat me more than anyone since his reign as proper headmaster coincided with my rise from infancy to boyhood, from naughtiness to wickedness. When he beat me it was always with a glum resignation. ‘Oh God, it’s you again...’ he would bark when he arrived at his study to find me waiting outside the door, the approved station for those who had been sent for a thrashing. ‘And what is it this time?’ Did it do me any harm being beaten? Did it do me any good? I really don’t know. Autres temps, autres mœurs — it is now considered barbaric, sadistic, harmful, disgraceful, perverted and unpardonable. As far as I was concerned it had at least the virtue of being over quickly, unlike detention, lines or the wearisome cleaning and sweeping errands that stood as lesser penalties. Often, in fact, one was given a choice of punishments and I always chose the cane. I never got any pleasure out of it, mind you. My sexual fantasies are, I trust, as weird, frightening and grotesque as yours and the next person’s and the person next to them, but flagellation, spanking, birching and the infliction of even the mildest pain have never been anything for me other than absolute turn-offs. There was pleasure in going straight to the school lays after a beating, pulling down one’s shorts and pants and flushing the loo, to the accompaniment of a great hissing sigh — like Tom sitting himself in a bucket of water after Jerry has set light to his tail — that I did enjoy. There was too the talismanic pride of showing one’s stripes to the dormitory, like a Prussian Junker displaying his duelling scars. ‘Wow, that one bit...’ ‘Nice grouping...’ ‘Actually Fry, if it breaks the skin and you bleed you can complain to the government and he’ll go to prison, that’s what I heard.’ ‘Apparently, if he raises his arm above shoulder height, it’s illegal...’ Maybe some of you reading this will think that men who can beat children like that are swine. I feel terrible about that because the men who beat me were not swine. Maybe now you’ll think people like me who can forgive their childhood beatings — or claim even that there is nothing to forgive — are victims of some sort of ‘cycle of abuse’. Maybe you think I should be angry, that I should damn the schoolmasters who beat me and damn my parents and damn the men and women who allowed it. Maybe you think there is nothing more pathetic, nothing that more perfectly illustrates all the vices and impediments of Old England than the spectacle of the Old Boy trying to defend the system that chastised him with strokes of the cane. Maybe you are right. Maybe I am a woeful and pathetic specimen. Maybe I do suffer without knowing it the disastrous consequences of a barbaric and outdated education. Maybe it has disturbed the balance of my mind. Maybe it has warped and thwarted me. Fuck knows. I don’t and, without wishing to be rude, you most certainly can’t know either. We are living in a statistically rare and improbable period of British life. The last twenty years are the only twenty years of our history in which children have not been beaten for misbehaviour. Every Briton you can think of, from Chaucer to Churchill, from Shakespeare to Shilton, was beaten as a child. If you are under thirty, then you are the exception. Maybe we are on the threshold of a brave new world of balanced and beautiful

61 Britons. I hope so. You won’t find me offering the opinion that beating is a good thing or recommending the return of the birch. I frankly regard corporal punishment as of no greater significance in the life of most human beings than bustles, hula-hoops, flared trousers, side-whiskers or any other fad. Until, that is, one says that it isn’t. Which is to say, the moment mankind decides that a practice like beating is of significance then it becomes of significance. I should imagine that were I a child now and found myself being beaten by schoolmasters I would be highly traumatised by the experience, for every cultural signal would tell me that beating is, to use the American description, a ‘cruel and unusual punishment’ and I would feel singled out for injustice and smart and wail accordingly. Let’s try — and God knows it’s hard — to be logical about this. If we object to corporal punishment, and I assume we do, on what grounds is this objection based? On the grounds that it is wrong to cause a child pain? Well I don’t know about you, but when I recall childhood pain, I don’t recall the pains of toothache, a thrashed backside, broken bones, stubbed toes, gashed knees or twisted ankles — I recall the pains of loneliness, boredom, abandonment, humiliation, rejection and fear. Those are the pains on which I might and, still sometimes do, dwell, and those pains, almost without exception, were inflicted on me by other children and by myself. I have paused on this subject of corporal punishment because the issue is so culturally loaded today as to be almost impossible to inspect. It comes in so many people’s minds very close to the idea of ‘abuse’, a word which when used within ten spaces of the word ‘child’ causes hysteria, madness and stupidity in almost everybody. I know that had I dispassionately described to you the use of the cane without any comment, without summoning counsel for a conference in chambers, then many of you would have wondered what I was up to and whether I was entirely balanced. You will have to form your own judgements, but try to understand that when I think about being caned for repeatedly talking after lights out, or for Mobbing About In The Malt Queue, and other such mad prepschooly infractions, I feel far less passion and distress than I do when I think about the times I was put into detention for crimes of which I was innocent. If it should so happen that you could prove to me that one of the masters who beat me may have derived sexual gratification from the practice, I would shrug my shoulders and say, ‘Poor old soul, at least he never harmed me.’ Abuse is exploitation of trust and exploitation of authority and I was lucky enough never to suffer from that or from any violation or cruelty, real or imagined. It is a cliché that most clichés are true, but then like most clichés, that cliché is untrue. Sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will always hurt me. Bones mend and become actually stronger in the very place they were broken and where they have knitted up; mental wounds can grind and ooze for decades and be re- opened by the quietest whisper. Kirk drawing attention to my singing, that was abuse, and he was just a silly child who knew no better. Mid Kemp and his mad bacon-slicers, that was the Game and it amuses me. Sidebar over. Of all the school rules I liked most to flout, the breaking of bounds gave me the greatest pleasure.

62 Perhaps there’s a metaphor there, I do hope not, all this psychology grows wearisome. The school grounds were extensive. I’ve made glancing mention of the lake, woods and pony paddocks. Uley itself lay out of bounds and beyond legal reach. We crocodiled to the church there on special Sundays — the Christmas Carol service, for example, when Easter Day fell in term time, or when the school play was performed in the village hall (‘Stephen Fry’s Mrs Higgins would grace any drawing-room’, my first review) — but at all other times Uley was verboten, off limits, here be dragons, don’t you bloody dare. Uley had a village shop-cum-post-office crammed with Sherbet Fountains, Everlasting Strips, and two types of penny chew — Fruit Salads and Blackjacks. I don’t know why they were called penny chews, they should really have been called farthing chews because you could buy four of these little wrapped squares of deliciously sticky tooth-decay for just one penny. The village shop also sold a brown, shredded confection that was packaged to look like rolling tobacco and tasted I think of coconut. It came wrapped in waxed paper and had a picture of a Spanish Galleon on the front. That and the endless varieties of other pretend smoking materials — candied cigarettes with red dyed ends, chocolate cigarettes wrapped in real paper and liquorice pipes — must now seem almost as wicked to the modern puritan sensibility as child-beating and fox-hunting. The most important thing about these sweets however is that they could not be bought at the school tuck-shop. The tuck-shop had its Fry’s Turkish Delight (bane of my life, that and all the other nicknaming possibilities around it), Crunchie and Picnic bars, but only the village shop had rice-paper flying saucers filled with sherbet, pink foamy shrimps, rubbery little milk bottles and chocolate buttons sprinkled with hundreds and thousands. The ownership and sly proffering of paper bags filled with those forbidden fruits became almost as great a totem of heroism as the possession of pubic hair, and was shared with friends in just the same shifty but giggling, shy but boastful manner. Since no amount of pinching, teasing, soaping, threatening and cajoling could cause even the blondest silken millimetre of pubic hair to sprout from me, sweets became my testament of manliness. Aside from all that, the very act of slipping and sliding around the lake’s edge, cutting down past the boathouse, across the gymkhana field with its dressage poles and tatty jumps, over the second games field, across the lane and into Out of Bounds territory had its own thrill. At this time too, nature’s best side, the side that didn’t creep and crawl and ooze, was beginning to open itself up to me. Cider With Rosie, in literary terms, was just about an item of school uniform to us; many of the boys knew Laurie Lee as a friend, he sometimes drank his beer in Uley’s pub and on special occasions came to read to us. A killer Cyborg from Vark would fall in love with the countryside if he heard Laurie Lee reading about it. The walk from the school to the shop was, I reckon, a little over a country mile, but I liked to linger. I picture myself, eyes streaming and face blotched with hay fever, sitting under elm trees, firing plantain buds, blowing grassblade fanfares through my thumbs and rubbing nettled shins with dock. The overpowering breath of watermint from the skirting of the lake margin would stay with me until one of my sandals had broken the crisp leathery surface of a cowpat and from then on I would carry with me the decent tang of sun-cured dung. There was a curious pleasure to be gained too, perhaps a hangover from

63 playing rudies with Timothy in Chesham, from pulling down my shorts and crapping in the grass unseen by all but cattle. Maybe that’s a primal thing, maybe it’s just that I am weird. I never liked to be accompanied on these trips. I once tried going with someone else, but it felt wrong. He was too scared to dwell on the journey itself, too keen to eat all the sweets before getting back to school, too frightened, in short, of getting caught. Getting caught, I think now, is what it was all about to me. People sometimes say to me these days, ‘You know, I was just as bad as you at school, Stephen. Thing is, I never got found out.’ Well, where’s the fun in that? I always want to reply. That’s a boast? ‘I never got found out, clever, clever me. I am quite aware, by the way, that I am the exception and they are the rule. I’m the freak in this equation, I know that. Not that I actively, consciously knew that I wanted to be caught. I did love sweets, God how I loved them. The mouthful of fillings today and the gaps where grinders should be show that I loved sweets long past the proper age. One afternoon, perhaps I was eleven years old and moving towards a kind of seniority within the school, I came across a joke shop catalogue lying about in one of the dormitories. I suppose the rest of the school was playing cricket and I had managed as usual to get myself Off Games by inducing an asthma attack. I loved the feeling of having the school to myself, the distant shouts and echoes without and the absolute stillness within. My heart always sank when the final whistles went, the school noises drew closer and I knew that I was no longer the master of the lost domain. A voice is whispering in my ear that this joke shop catalogue belonged to a boy called Nick Charles-Jones, but this is of minor importance. For a half-crown postal order, it seemed, a fellow could have dispatched to him: • chattering false teeth • a small round membrane of cloth and tin which allowed one to throstle, warble and apparently throw one’s voice like a ventriloquist • a bar of soap that turned the user soot black • itching powder • a sugar cube that melted and left a realistic looking spider floating on the surface of the victim s tea-cup • a finger-ring buzzer • a look-alike chewing gum pack that snapped like a mouse-trap. Trouble was, I had no postal order, nor any access to such a thing. Unlike Billy Bunter, the Winslow Boy and other famous schoolchildren, I didn’t even really know what a postal order was. To be perfectly frank with you I’m still not that sure today. However. It occurred to me that if I mustered up two shillings and sixpence in loose change and then stuck all the coins together with sticky tape and sent them off for ‘The most hilarious collection of jokes and gags EVER assembled’ with a note of apology accompanying, then only the flintiest-hearted mail-order joke shop would refuse to honour my order. I had about a shilling on me, which left one and sixpence to go. One and six (seven

64 and a half pence in today’s currency) was not a great deal of money, but any sum that you do not have when you are eleven years old seems a fortune. I expect today schoolchildren get sent four credit card application forms every day through the post like everybody else, but things were different then. The sand gold and navy blue of a Barclaycard had only just been introduced and was at first taken up by rather dodgy characters —the sort of people who smoked Rothmans, drove E-Types and swanked about the place with BEA bags over their shoulders and were best played by Leslie Phillips or Guy Middleton. Stealing had become second nature to me by this time and the boys’ changing room was the place to start. Up and down the pegs I would go, lightly tapping the trousers and blazers until I heard the chink of coins. You can steal from the school, you can steal from a shop, you can steal from a bank. Stealing money from the clothing of friends is ... what is it? It is not naughty or unstable or unmanageable or difficult: it is as bad as bad can be. It is wicked, it is evil. It makes you a... THIEF ... and nobody loves a thief. I still blush and shiver when I hear the word used aggressively. It crops up in films on television. Gentlemen, I am sorry to say that we appear to have a thief among us. Stop thief’ You thieving little rat... Why, you’re nothing but a cheating, lying thief... It’s still doing it to me, that word. The changing rooms. The clink of money. Breathing hard. Mouth parted. Heart hammering. They are all outside playing games. Coast is clear. I am trying hard, even now, to forgive myself for these years of stealing. The shoplifting, the more glamorous insanity with credit cards later on, all that can be laughed or shrugged off. Perhaps. But this, this was nasty, this was sly. ‘There always was something sly about you, Fry.’ There was a way some masters and prefects had of pronouncing my surname that seemed to me, in my guilt, to mean cunning and unclean and ratty and foxy and devious and unhealthy and deceitful and duplicitous and sly. Sly Fry. I could argue in my defence that I spread the load that afternoon. I could say that I needed (needed?) one and sixpence, so I took just small quantities of three-penny bits and pennies to make up the sum, rather than cleaning out and impoverishing one particular victim. But that’s not right. I took small amounts from several people to lessen the chance of there being a fuss. ‘Bloody hell. I had a bob here at lunchtime ...‘ would have been the cry of any boy robbed of a whole shilling. Whereas, ‘Tsh, I’m sure had tuppence somewhere was less likely to raise a hue and cry.

65 Those changing rooms at Stouts Hill, then later at Uppingham. From Mary Hench’s boot to the regular, almost daily ransacking of boys’ pockets for cash, changing rooms have been my killing fields. I’m still trying to find excuses for myself. I’m wondering whether it was some kind of vengeance. I hated games so much, hated so much those who loved them and excelled at them. Was that why the preferred locus of theft for me was always the changing room, with its casually dropped jock-straps, muddy laces and stink of stale sweat? Did I hate games because I was so shite at them, or was I so shite at them because I hated them and did I hate them because of... THE BATHS & THE SHOWERS? Is that where it all begins? With the cock-shy terror of the showers? It did consume me, the thought of undressing in front of others. It ate at me like acid throughout my schooldays and beyond. There’s more on this theme coming later. Let’s just say for the time being that I was wicked. When I wanted money or sweets, I stole them and I didn’t care from whom. From my mother’s handbag at home or from the desks and hanging clothes of my fellow pupils. For the moment, we’ll call me a weasley cunt and have done with it. So, there we are. I’m back in the dormitory sellotaping together nine or ten coins. With a neatly filled-in order-form they are slipped into an envelope which I stuff with a handkerchief to make an innocent package — after all, perhaps the postman may be an awful thief and if he felt the coins he might just steal them, and wouldn’t that be too dreadful... It was Julian Mather’s handkerchief that did the stuffing as it happens, the nametape lovingly stitched by a sister, a nanny or an au pair perhaps. Myself, to the great aggravation of my mother, I could never keep a handkerchief for longer than a week. ‘What do you do with them, darling? Eat them?’ And I would repeat the eternal schoolboy lie. ‘Oh, everybody loses their handkerchiefs, Mummy.’ Or perhaps I would blame the school laundry. ‘Nobody’s handkerchief comes back. Everyone knows that...’ So, down the stairs I crept, on the hunt now for postage stamps. I knew that Cromie was umpiring a cricket match and that his study was likely to be unlocked. It was an intensely exciting pleasure to be illicitly alone in the headmaster’s study. On one occasion when I had been there before, rifling though his papers, I had come across a report on myself. It concerned my Eleven Plus results. We had taken the Eleven Plus at Stouts Hill without ever knowing what it was or what it meant. My form master, Major Dobson, had simply come in one day with a pile of papers and said, ‘You’re all getting rather lazy, so I’ve decided you can keep yourselves busy with these.’ He had handed out some strangely printed papers and told us we had half an hour or fifty minutes or whatever it was to answer all the questions.

66 We were never told that this was the notorious Eleven Plus, the national compulsory test that separated the children of the land into Grammar School children and Secondary Modern children, dummies and smart-arses, failures and achievers, smarmy gits and sad no-hopers, greasy clever-clogses and rejected thickies. A stupider and more divisive nonsense has rarely been imposed upon a democratic nation. Many lives were trashed, many hopes blighted, many prides permanently dented on account of this foolish, fanatical and irrational attempt at social engineering. Since all of us at prep school were bound for independent public schools who took no notice of such drivel anyway, the whole thing was considered by the Stouts Hill staff to be a massive irrelevance, a tedious and impertinent piece of bureaucracy to be got though with as little fuss as possible and certainly without the boys needing to be told anything about it. The examination itself took the form of one of those fatuous Eynsecky IQ tests, mostly to do with shape-recognition and seeing what new word could be slipped between two existing words to make two phases, that sort of hum-dudgeon... BLOW... LOT ... for example, to which the answer would be JOB, as in ‘blow job’ and ‘job lot’ — though I’ve a feeling that may not have been one of the actual questions set for us on the day. I remember questions like: ‘HEAR is to LISTEN as SEE is to.. .?‘ or ‘Complete this numerical sequence 1,3,5,7,11 ...?‘ And so on. So, foraging through the headmaster’s desk one afternoon I had happened upon a list which called itself Eleven Plus results, listing Intelligence Quotient Results or some such guff. I noticed it because my name was at the top with an asterisk typed next to it and the words ‘Approaching genius’ added in brackets. Gromie, the headmaster had underlined it in his blue-black ink and scrawled, ‘Well that bloody explains everything...’ It will seem boasting wherever I go with this, but I was not in the least pleased to learn that I had a high IQ. For a start I didn’t like the ‘approaching’ part of the phase ‘approaching genius’ (if you’re going to be a freak, be a complete freak, no point at all in going at it half-cock) and secondly I wriggled in discomfort at the idea of being singled out for something over which I felt I had no control. They might as well have exclaimed at my height or hair colour for all that I felt it had anything to do with me as a person. Years later as an adolescent, when I fell into the error of confusing my brain with my self, I actually went so tragically far as to send off for and complete the Mensa application test and proved to myself that I was more than ‘approaching’ genius and felt extremely self-satisfied. It was only when I realised that the kind of intelligence that wants to get into Mensa, succeeds in getting into Mensa and then runs Mensa and the kind of intelligence that I thought worth possessing were so astronomically distant from each other, that the icing fell off the cake with a great squelch. It is on occasions like this that I praise God for my criminal tendencies, my homosexuality, my jewishness and the loathing of the bourgeois, the conventional and the respectable that these seem to have inculcated in me. I could so easily, given the smallest twist to the least gene on the outermost strand of my string of DNA, have turned into one of those awful McWhirterish

67 ticks, one of those asocial right-wing libertarian freaks who think their ability to find anagrams and solve Rubik’s cubes is a serious index of mental value. Having said which, I was determined to solve Rubik’s Cube myself and pride myself on my ability to do the Times crossword quickly. I square this rather vile vanity with myself by claiming that I do these things to show that it is possible to have a knack with such games and not be a graceless Freedom Association beardie .or a Clive Sinclair style loon. Also, if I’m honest, I submit myself to these forms of mental masturbation from time to time to prove to myself that my brain hasn’t yet been rotted away by drugs and alcohol. My great Cambridge friend, Kim Harris, the friend to whom I dedicated my second novel, The Hippopotamus, is a superb chess player, attaining a Master level at a young age: he takes a wicked delight in drinking at the chess board and being wholly unlike the scurfy, bottle- end spectacled schlemiels whom he faces over the board. I think we are both honest enough to admit that we are each in our own way guilty of snobbery of a quite dreadful kind. ‘While on the subject of intelligence, I have to say that I have never found it an appealing quality in anyone and therefore have never expected anyone to find it appealing in me. It grieves me deeply that many people who think me intelligent or believe that I fancy myself intelligent or have read somewhere that some journalist has described me as such, expect me to judge others by intelligence. The number of times strangers have opened conversations with me in this manner... ‘Of course, I’m no brain box like you...’ ‘I know I’monly stupid, but...’ Or worse still, ‘Don’t you find it rather dull being surrounded by actors for so much of the time? I mean let’s face it, most of them are thick as two short planks.’ I just don’t know where to begin with this kind of talk. Even if it were true that most actors are stupid, and it isn’t, the idea that I might project myself as the kind of person who looks for intelligence in others as an index of value sends the creepiest of shivers down my spine. I might use long words from time to time and talk rapidly or name-drop culturally here and there and display any number of other silly donnish affectations, but if this gives the impression that I might admire a similar manner or nature in others, then it makes me just want to go ‘bibbly-bobbly-- bubbly-snibbly wib-wib floppit’ for the rest of my life, read nothing but Georgette Heyer, watch nothing but Emmerdale, do nothing but play snooker, take coke and get drunk and use no words longer than ‘wanker’ and ‘cunt’. I don’t know many people who can do the Times crossword more quickly than me. There again I do know dozens and dozens of people vastly more intelligent than me for whom the simplest cryptic clue is a mystery — and one they are not in the least interested in penetrating. Also, it must be said, I don’t know many people as capable of my kinds of supreme dumbness. I’m the last person on earth to bear with equanimity that kind of Bernard Inghamy, Fred Truemany Yorkshireman who blathers on about nous, gumption, common sense and the University of Life —‘you see, they’re all very well these Oxbridge educated so-called intellectuals but have you ever seen them trying to boil a tyre or change an egg ...?‘ and all that pompous bum-wash, but, awful as such attitudes are they are no worse than the eugenic snobbery of those who believe that the ability to see the word ‘carthorse’

68 scrambled in the word ‘orchestra’ or to name every American state in alphabetical order raises them above the level of the average twitcher, trainspotter or Gyles Brandreth style word-game funster. The discovery of Cromie’s scrawled ‘Well that bloody explains everything ...‘ next to my name determined me to investigate his study on every available occasion. I did not like the idea that things were being written about me without my knowing it. So, back to our main time-line again. I’m in the study alone. This time I’m looking for stamps. Cromie had one of those elegant polished desks, with lots of knobs and sliders and fluted volutes and secret drawers — the kind of desk a sly fox like me loved to play with. I succeeded in pressing a wooden stud under the desk: a section flew back on a spring and what did I see? Sweets. Bags and bags of sweets. Confiscated sweets. Foam shrimps, fruit salads, blackjacks, flying-saucers, red- liquorice bootlaces, every desirable item of Uley village shop bounty that could be imagined. In that lips-parted, heart-pounding, face-flushed state that can signify sexual ecstasy or the thrill of guilt and fear, I grabbed from each bag four, five, six or seven sweets, stuffing them into my pockets, unable to believe that such good fortune could have come my way. You set out to steal a few postage stamps and there before you is a drawer filled with all the treasure you have ever dreamed of. Granddaddy was watching, that I knew. It was the one great worm in every delicious apple I ever stole. My mother’s father had only recently died and he had become my figura rerum, my familiar. I knew whenever I stalked about my bedroom naked, sitting on mirrors, sticking a finger up my bum or doing any of those other mad, guilty childish things that constitute infantile sexual play to the psychologist, that Granddaddy Was Watching. Whenever I did truly bad things too, like stealing, lying and cheating, Granddaddy Was Watching then. I had learned to ignore him, of course, and the disappointed look in his eyes as he turned away in disgust. He expected so much better of his grandson than this. But then I had learned to ignore the sad, sweet expectations of the soft-eyed Jesus who also watched me whenever I was bad. At that time I never thought of myself as Jewish, which is perhaps as well, or those two Jews, one recently dead, the other fluttering like a dove over the altar every morning at chapel, might have driven me to a wilder state of madness and self-loathing than I was already in. Just as I crammed a few final penny chews into my last spare pocket I heard, not too far distant, the creak of a footstep upon a wooden plank. I pushed the secret drawer shut and peered through the study door. I could see no one there, just the deserted hallway and the birdcages. Perhaps the mynah bird had been practising new sounds. I edged myself out of the study, closed the door quietly and turned, just in time to see Mr Dealey, the school butler, emerge from the dining room, bearing silver candlesticks and a vast epergne. ‘Ah, now then, Master Fry,’ he said in his Jack-Warner-I’ve-been-about-the-world-a- bit-and-have-got-your-number kind of a way. I was sure that he had no idea that I had been inside the study. Surely he had seen me

69 at the door and thought I was waiting outside? ‘You won’t find the Headmaster inside on a fine afternoon like this, young Fry,’ he said, confirming the thought. ‘You shouldn’t be inside yourself. Young lad. Sunny day. It’s not healthy.’ I started to pant a little, and pointed to my chest. ‘Off games,’ I said with a brave, shoulder-heaving wheeze. ‘Ho,’ said Dealey. ‘Then perhaps you should come with me and learn how to polish silver.’ ‘No fear!’ I said and scuttled away. Close calls of that nature always charged me up into a state of mania. My passion at the time for the prison-of-war genre in books and films derived, I suppose, from an identification with the POWs and the edge of discovery and detection on which they permanently lived ... replacing the stove over the tunnel’s hiding-place just before the entrance of the Commandant, popping their heads down seconds before the searchlight revealed them. Books like The Wooden Horse and Reach for the Sky were full of these moments and I consumed them with a passionate fever. This time, I was away and free, a whole pocketful of sweets to the good, not a Jerry in sight and the Swiss border only a few miles hence. I slipped out into the garden and made my way towards the lake. The boathouse there was a good place to sit and eat sweets. On the way however, I encountered Donaldson, who was also off games and he had a new game to show me. An electric fence had just been erected around a section of one of the fields. This area was to be turned into a fourth eleven cricket pitch or something similar, and the fence was needed to stop the ponies from going near. An announcement had been made about it and how we were not to touch it. ‘But how about this,’ said Donaldson, taking me towards the fence. I followed him in some trepidation, he was no particular friend of mine, Donaldson. He was big and beefy, only off games because he was injured, not because he was cowardly or a weed. He had never bullied me, nor ever tried to, but I feared some practical joke which would end with me being pushed against the electric fence and being given an electric shock. Growing up in a house with Victorian wiring, I had got to know enough about electric shocks to dread their sullen thumping kicks. Donaldson stood by the fence, motioned me to be quiet and then suddenly leaned out and grabbed the wire with one hand before letting go of it again just as suddenly. His body hadn’t jolted or jumped at all. ‘Is it switched off then?’ I asked. ‘There’s a ticker,’ he said. ‘Listen.’ Sure enough, from some control device on one of the corner fence-posts came a regular ticking sound. ‘Every time it ticks,’ said Donaldson, ‘it sends a charge. But if you grab it in between ticks, you’re okay. Go on. Have a go.’ Still fearing some practical joke, I listened to the ticks until I felt sure of their tempo and then touched the wire and let go quickly. Nothing. I laughed. This was fun.

70 We carried on with the game, refining our ability to touch the wire for longer and longer periods as we became more and more familiar with the rhythm of the ticker and together, Donaldson and I bonded in one of those complete moments of childhood friendship that last only as long as the particular period of play, each of us knowing that the next time we met we would be no closer than we had been before. We were soon joined by other boys, returning from their cricket, rounders and athletics, and Donaldson and I, masters-of-ceremony, initiated them into the Ways of the Ticker. Then I had an idea. ‘What about this?’ I said. ‘Suppose we all link hands and stretch out in a line. Then one of us grabs the wire and actually gets a shock. The current should go all along the line getting weaker and weaker until it reaches the last person. ‘What’s the point of that?’ ‘Well, the winner is the person with the most points. How many of us are there? Fifteen. So the person who actually touches the wire gets fifteen points, the person next to him fourteen and so on, down to the last person who gets one. If you break the link you’re out.' It took a certain amount of organisation, but eventually some rules were roughed out that allowed everyone to get the chance to be the Fifteen Man, the one who touched the wire and bore the brunt of the current. Never physically brave I decided for who knows what reason, that I should be the Fifteen Man first. Donaldson was next to me and grasped my free hand. When we were all firmly linked I leaned towards the wire. ‘Remember,’ I said sternly, ‘anyone who lets go is O-U-T out. For ever.’ Fifteen heads nodded solemnly. I reached forwards, held my breath and grasped the wire. The first tick sent a surge through me that almost knocked me off my feet, but I held on for a second tick, almost unaware of the screams and giggles that were spreading out along the line. After the third or fourth shock, I let go and looked back. Fifteen boys were jumping up and down, yelling and giggling. The line had held. The boy at the end, who had received the least shock was none other than Bunce and he was pink and grinny with the pleasure of having kept his nerve and held on. We played this game for another half hour and I’m not sure I had ever been so completely happy. There was a combination of delights here that had never come together for me before: the knowledge of sweets and sweets and sweets in my pocket, the pride of a new-found physical courage, the pleasure of being not just part of a game, but master of it, the delicious awareness that I had somehow persuaded fifteen boys to break a school rule. We were in it together. I hadn’t joined in with them, they had joined in with me. Bunce had never overlooked the casual kindness of our first meeting in the Paddington train. He didn’t ever tag, having too much dignity to be one of nature’s hangers on, but he always liked me, no matter what I did, and he always grinned when he caught my eye and looked sad when I was teased or shouted at or in trouble. Everyone had enjoyed a turn as the Fifteen Man, we had worked out the right number of pulses to hold on for to ensure the maximum pleasure and now Donaldson and I were conferring on refinements. He suggested that the chain should actually be a semicircle and





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




71 that the last man in the line should touch the wire at the same time as the first. Someone warned with awe and dread in their voice that this would cause a Short Circuit and that the person in the middle, when the two pulses of current met, would be burnt to a cinder. Perhaps we should collect a pony and use that as a guinea-pig. A pony in the middle of the semi-circle seemed a very funny idea, and a pony being fried to a crisp struck Donaldson as the most fantastically amusing proposition he had ever heard. ‘Oh, we’ve just got to,’ he said. ‘Look! There’s Cloud. We’ll use Cloud.’ Cloud was an elderly grey pony with a great Thelwell-style underhang of a belly. Cloud was the first pony I had ever ridden and I hated the idea of her being electrocuted. I had inherited from my parents a love of animals that I frankly confess to be anthropomorphic, sentimental and extreme. The very sight of bears, seals and the more obviously endearing mammals will cause us all to weep copiously. I shall never forget the red mist that descended over me, years later, when I once saw youths throwing stones at some ducks in a park in King’s Lynn. I picked up some huge pieces of builder’s rubble nearby and started to hurl them at the boys, roaring the kind of meaningless obscenities that only pure fury can put into the mind. ‘You shit spike wank turdy bastardheads ... how do you fucking like it, you tossing tossers...’ that kind of thing. Were Donaldson and I going to fall out over the use of Cloud in the game? I really did not want that, but nor did I want to be the wet-blanket that doused the spreading warm glow of the moment, the kill-joy that dislocated that perfect rhythm of these unfolding new ideas. Improvised childhood games, like children themselves, are imponderably unpredictable in their robustness and their fragility. I don’t want to paint Donaldson as some cruel monster. I am certain he would no more have countenanced the zapping of an innocent old pony than any of us. But this was never put to the test. A voice came clear down the hill to interrupt us. It was the deep and almost broken voice of Evans, a prefect and the school’s best bowler. One of his faster deliveries had once cracked a middle stump in two. He took the Cricket Ball Throwing Cup every year, on one occasion throwing the ball so far that it went clean over a lane and was never found. ‘Fry! Is Fry Minor down there?’ ‘Uh oh!’ said Donaldson, nudging me. I brushed silently past Donaldson and the others, all pleasure drained from me, and started to climb the hill towards the silhouette of Evans outlined on the ridge. What had I done wrong? That’s absurd, I knew what I had done wrong, but I could not understand how I could have been found out. It was impossible. Maybe Mr Dealey had seen me coming out of Cromie’s study. Maybe someone had missed a few pennies from their pocket and had guessed that I had stolen them. Maybe there had even been a witness. ‘Get a move on, will you?’ Evans stood under the great horse chestnut at the top of the hill and glowered down at me as I laboured up towards him. ‘Haven’t got all day.’ He was in his cricket whites, streaked with the long green grass stains of a man who isn’t afraid to dive. ‘Sorry, Evans,’ I said. ‘Only, it’s my asthma. I can’t run too much in this weather...’ ‘Oh yes, your asthma. Well, never mind that, I’m to take you to the headmaster’s study.’

72 ‘Sorry?’ ‘Asthma and deafness too?’ ‘But why? What have I done?’ Evans turned away as I reached the ridge of the hill, not even looking to see whether I would follow. ‘You’d know that better than me. Cromie just puts his head out of his study door, sees me and says, “Evans, track down Fry the Younger and bring him to me at once.”’ For Evans the event was merely a distraction from nets or from whatever else he had on his mind and I could see that he led me without either relish or sympathy, only with careless disinterest. I trailed behind him like a wet spaniel wondering furiously what it was that Cromie could know. We reached the outside of his study too early for any excuse to have come to my head, nor had I had time to rehearse fully in my mind the stout and stolid style of blank innocence that would come to me when Cromie confronted me with my crime, the hot indignation of my denial, the hooting outrage that would possess me the moment he accused me of... of what? ‘Enter!’ Evans had rapped on the door. I stood there, legs braced. ‘That means “come in”,’ said Evans, swinging the door open for me. Cromie was not at his desk. He was sitting in one of his two leather armchairs, reading. The first thing I looked for, with the quickest darting glance, was any sign that the secret drawer to the desk was open. It was not. ‘Thank you, Evans. Very prompt.’ ‘Sir.’ Evans vanished with another turn on his heel. He went on in later life to Harrow, playing cricket for the school and shining in the cadet force, where his ability to turn smartly on his heel won him, I have no doubt, the Sword of Honour and the admiration of all. I lingered in the threshold. There was a jaunty gleam in Cromie’s exceptionally blue eyes, and a crisp upturn to his russet moustache that puzzled and frightened me. For all I know Cromie’s eyes are brown and his moustache was green: I hope he will forgive any inaccuracy. I believe he is a wise enough man to know that false memory can be more accurate than recorded fact. ‘Come in, Fry, come in!’ he cried with the affable assertiveness of an archdeacon inviting a curate in for a friendly talk on Pelagianism. ‘How kind, sir,’ I said, ever pert. ‘Sit,’ said Cromie, indicating the other armchair, the armchair whose seat and cushions, up until this moment, I had only ever seen from upside-down, while bent over one shining leather arm preparing to receive the cane. I sat in some bewilderment. I was too far away from leaving the school to be ready to receive the famous Leaver’s Talk about which the school whispered fiercely at the end of each term, the Leaver’s Talk which told everyone what they already knew about Vaginas and Babies and Testicles and Urges and Some Other Boys. I stared at the carpet hopelessly confused. After what seemed an age, Cromie put down whatever it was that he was reading and

73 twinkled across at me. ‘Fry,’ he said, slapping a cavalry-twilled knee. ‘I am going to make a prediction.’ ‘Sir?’ ‘You are going to go far.’ ‘Am I, sir?’ ‘Believe me, yes. You are going to go very, very far. Whether to the Palace of Westminster or to Wormwood Scrubs I can’t quite tell. Probably both, if I know my Fry.’ He rubbed the knee he had already slapped in the manner of an older man, a man whose arthritis or war wound might be playing merry hell, but was none the less a companionable reminder of better days. ‘Do you know why you will go far, Fry?’ ‘No, sir.’ ‘You’ll go far because you have the most colossal nerve.’ ‘Have I, sir?’ ‘For colossal nerve, for sheer, ruddy cheek, I have never met anyone to match you.’ All this said so easily, so chummily so — there was no escaping the word, mad as it seemed — so admiringly. ‘Fry has a problem,’ Cromie went on, seeming now to be addressing the bookcase. ‘He has a parcel he wishes to send, but, drat and curse it, he has no stamp. So what does he do? He goes into Sir’s study, cool as you please, sees a heap of letters and packages waiting to be stamped, puts his own on top of the pile and leaves. “Old Dealey will take the whole lot out to the post office and mine will be stamped along with the rest of them,” he thinks to himself. How was he to know that Sir might come along before Dealey had taken them away and recognise the highly individual handwriting of the most impudent scoundrel this school has ever had the honour to house?’ God, God, God ... the joke shop order ... the pennies stuck together. I had clean forgotten. In all the excitement of discovering those sweets I must have laid the package down on the desk when fiddling with the secret drawer. Great heavens almighty. ‘Such cavalier insolence deserves a reward, Fry,’ said Cromie. ‘Your reward is that Dealey has duly taken your parcel to Uley along with the others and it will be sent to its destination at the school’s expense and with my compliments.’ He rubbed his chin and chuckled. Maybe Jesus Christ and Granddaddy did not judge and punish. Maybe they loved me. I knew what was expected of me in return and gave Cromie the full repertoire: the ruefully apologetic stretching of the lips, the bashfully sheepish grin, the awkwardly embarrassed shifting in my seat. ‘Well, you know, sir. I just thought... ‘I know very well, sir, what you just thought,’ said Cromie, smiling back as he stood. He looked about him. ‘This must be the first time you’ve been inside this room without leaving it with a sore backside. Well, count yourself lucky. Use some of that colossal nerve to better account in future.’ It was true that the only times I had been in that study in Cromie’s company had been to receive two or three of the best. The last time had been for a visit to the village shop. Thee strokes, with a promise of double that amount next time.

74 I stood up now, and squeezed my eyes tight in horror as I heard the rustle of paper bags in my trouser pockets. This would be no time for illegal sweets to tumble from me like coins from a one-armed bandit. ‘It’s all right, there’s no need to look so frightened. Off you go. ‘Thank you very much and I’m sorry, sir.’ ‘Go and sin no more, that’s all I ask. Go and sin no bloody more.' Sitting under a cedar of Lebanon half an hour later, stuffing foam shrimp after foam shrimp into my mouth, I mused on fate. Maybe I was brave, in a certain sort of way. It took courage to be deceitful and dishonest and conniving and wicked. More courage than it took to toe the line. The late summer light was lovely on the lawns and lake, there were more fruit salads and a bag of flying saucers left in my blazer pocket. ‘F-r-r-r-ry!’ When the name was called with such rolling menace, it could only mean Pollock, Pollock the head boy with raven black hair and a sadistic hatred of all things Fry the Younger. He came round from behind the tree and had snatched the bag from out of my hand before I knew what was happening. ‘So we’ve been to the village shop again, have we?’ ‘No!’ I said, indignantly, ‘we have not.’ ‘Don’t bother lying. Shrimps, milk bottles, flying saucers and blackjacks. Do you think I’m an idiot?’ ‘Yes I do Pollock. I do think you’re an idiot. I haven’t been to the village shop.’ He struck me across the face. ‘Don’t be cheeky, you little creep. Empty your pockets.’ Because of that fall at Chesham Prep my nose has always been immensely sensitive to the slightest percussion. The least strike will cause tears to spring up. In those days the tears were added to by the humiliating realisation that they looked like real tears. ‘Oh for God’s sake, stop blubbing and empty your pockets.’ There is nothing like a false accusation to cause even more tears. ‘How many times do I have to tell you,’ I howled. ‘I haven’t been to the village shop!’ ‘Yeah, yeah, yeah. Sure you haven’t. And what have we got here then?’ If the memory weren’t so absurdly anachronistic, I could almost swear that Pollock ripped open one of the flying saucers and put his tongue to the sherbet like a Hollywood cop tasting white powder. ‘But it’s not from the village shop! It’s not, it’s not!’ There was no getting through to this idiot. ‘Christ, you’re for the high jump this time,’ said Pollock, turning away with all my spoils. As he spoke we both heard the bell ring for tea. He looked up towards the main school buildings. ‘By the ships straight after tea,’ he grunted and stumped up the hill. How strange that the phrase ‘by the ships’ has only just come back to me. At one end of a corridor, the other end of which led to the headmaster’s study, there

75 were two model battleships mounted in glass cases. A prefect who sent you to see the headmaster always said ‘By the ships, after lunch ...‘ or ‘One more squeak from you, and you’ll be outside the ships’. Odd that I didn’t remember those ships earlier on in the telling of the story. I think one of them may have been HMS Hood, but maybe I’m wrong. I am certain too that they had red paint on the funnel which seems unlikely in a royal naval vessel. Perhaps they were cruise liners. Whatever they were, they spelled disaster. With rising panic I stumbled up after Pollock screaming at him that I hadn’t, I hadn’t, I hadn’t been to the village shop. I heard only answering echoes of laughter as he disappeared into the school. I heard a small voice at my elbow. ‘What’s the matter, Fry? Whatever is the matter?’ I looked down to see the anxious brown eyes of Bunce blinking up at me. I wiped a sleeve across my snot-running nose and tear-stained cheeks. I could not bear it that one who so admired me should see me in such a state. As I was wiping that sleeve the idea came into my head fully born and fully armed. The speed of its conception, birth and growth almost took my breath away. I had followed Evans earlier in the afternoon all the way from the electric fence to Cromie’s study without being able to think of any defence to any accusation and now — in deeper trouble by far — a rescue plan had emerged in a second. It was complete in my mind before I had even removed the sleeve from my face. As Biggles never tired of telling his comrades, there is always a way. Always. No matter how tight the squeak, and remember chums, we’ve been in tighter squeaks than this, there is always a way out. Algy, look lively and pass me that rope... ‘Pollock’s just caught me with a load of tuck from the village shop,’ I said in a low voice, laden with doom. Bunce’s eyes rounded still further. I could tell that the glamour and exoticism of village shop tuck frightened and fascinated him. This was by now at least his second year, I suppose, but somehow, like little Arthur in Tom Brown’s Schooldays, he was always functionally the youngest boy in the school. I remember that earlier on this summer term, a master had casually pointed out to him that he had turned up to a PE lesson in white plimsolls instead of black and he had gone redder than a geranium and wept and wobbled for days afterwards. His sixth term at the school, he hadn’t even been close to punishment or the gentlest chastisement, but it was his first ever deviation from the letter of school law and it had upset him deeply. ‘Golly,’ he said. ‘Didn’t you get the whack last week for.. ?‘ ‘Exactly,’ I said, interrupting. The thing was to keep the little chap off balance. ‘And Gromie said if I was caught again I would be expelled.’ ‘Expelled?’ Bunce breathed the word in a terrified whisper as though it were nitro- glycerine that might explode if handled too roughly. I nodded tragically. ‘I don’t know what my mother and father would do if I were expelled,’ I said, sniffing a little sniff. ‘But why?’ ‘Why? Because it would upset them so much, of course!’ I said, nettled by such denseness. ‘No, I mean why did you go to the village shop again if you knew you would get expelled?’

76 Well, I mean really. Some people. ‘It’s ... it’s hard to explain,’ I said. ‘The thing is, never mind why, there’s just no way out, that’s the point. Pollock’s confiscated the evidence and he’s going to ...‘ My voice trailed off in sudden wonderment as an idea seemed to catch hold. ‘Unless, that is, unless . . ‘Unless what?’ ‘No, no... it’s asking too much,’ I said, shaking my head. ‘Unless what?’ squeaked Bunce again. ‘It’s no good, I’d better face it. I’m done for.’ ‘Unless what?’ Bunce almost stamped the ground in his desperation to be told. ‘Well ... I was thinking that if I could say that I hadn’t been to the village shop but that I had got the tuck from someone else...’ I let the thought hang in the air. ‘You mean,’ said Bunce, ‘that if a boy said that he was the one who had been to the village shop not you then you wouldn’t be the one who had been and you wouldn’t be expelled?’ I didn’t bother to follow the literal meaning of that peculiar sentence but assumed he was along the right lines and nodded vigorously. ‘Trouble is,’ I said grimly, ‘who on earth would do that for me?’ I watched, with the detached and curious interest of the truly evil, as Bunce blinked, bit his lip, swallowed, bit his lip and blinked again. ‘I would,’ he said at long last. ‘Oh, no!’ I protested. ‘I couldn’t possibly ask you. I mean you’re far too...’ ‘Far too what?’ ‘Well... I mean, everyone knows, you’re a bit of a ... you know... I allowed myself to stumble, too tactful to finish the thought. Bunce’s face grew dark. ‘A bit of a what?’ he said, in something close to a growl. ‘Well,’ I said gently, ‘a bit of a goody-goody.’ He flushed and looked at the ground. I may just as well have charged him with complicity in the holocaust. ‘It’s okay,’ I said. ‘I’m the idiot. I don’t know what it is with me. I just can’t help being bad.’ He looked up at me, suddenly and for the first time annoyed with himself because he just couldn’t help being good. Which is what I had wanted him to feel. Christ, I’m smart, I said to myself. Perhaps this is what is meant by ‘approaching genius’. Do I know how to play a person like a fish, or do I not... I could see that Bunce was coming to an independent decision, or rather that he believed he was coming to an independent decision. ‘What’s got to happen,’ Bunce said, in a voice firm with resolution, ‘is that you’ve got to tell Mr Gromie that it was me who went to the village shop. Me not you.' ‘Oh but, Bunce...’ ‘No. That’s what you’ve got to do. Now come on, or we’ll be punished for being late for tea as well.’ ‘Good Christ, Fry!’ Cromie yelled, pacing up and down the study like a caged Tasmanian devil. ‘Not an hour after I congratulate you on your nerve than you’re back here proving to me that it’s not nerve, it’s cheek, it’s rudeness, it’s bloody insolence!’

77 I stood on the carpet, biding my time. ‘Did I, or did I not, boy, warn you last time that if you dared so much as to smell that blasted shop again I would have your guts for garters? Well?’ ‘But, sir...’ ‘Answer me, damn you! Did I, or did I not?’ ‘But sir, I haven’t been to the village shop.’ ‘What?’ Gromie stopped mid-stride. ‘Are you trying to tell me...’ he gestured towards the bags of confiscated sweets on his desk. It simply amazed me that the thought hadn’t crossed his mind to check his own stash in the secret drawer. Maybe he had forgotten all about it. ‘No, sir. I was eating those, but...’ ‘But what? You picked them off a tree? You fished them out of the lake? I wasn’t born yesterday, you know.’ I wasn’t born yesterday. Pull the other one. Have your guts for garters. Don’t try to teach your grandmother to suck eggs. Pull your socks up. Buck up your ideas. I wonder if schoolmasters still talk like that. ‘No, sir, it’s just that I didn’t go to the village shop.’ ‘What do you mean?’ Cromie almost clawed the air in his frustration. ‘What on earth do you mean?’ ‘Well, sir, what I say, sir.’ ‘Are you trying to tell me that someone else gave you those sweets?’ I nodded. At last he understood. ‘And who, may I ask, is this charitable person, this extraordinary philanthropist, who visits the village shop just so that he might bestow sweets on his friends like some benevolent lord of the manor distributing largess to his villeins? Hm? Who might this person be?’ ‘I ... I don’t like to sneak, sir...’ ‘Ho, no. Ho no you don’t,’ Gromie wasn’t buying that one. ‘If you don’t want your promised six strokes, then you had better tell me and tell me this minute.’ My lower lip wobbled as the betrayal was wrung from me. ‘Well, sir. It was Bunce, sir.’ I do not believe I have ever seen a man more surprised. Gromie’s eyebrows shot up to the ceiling and his lips went instantly white. ‘Did you just say Bunce?’ he asked in a hoarse whisper of disbelief. ‘Sir, yes, sir. ‘Bunce as in Bunce?’ I nodded. Cromie stared at me, eyeball to eyeball for about five seconds as if trying to pierce through to the very back of my soul. He shook his head, strode past me, flung open the door and yelled in a voice that thundered like Krakatoa, ‘Bunce! Bunce! Somebody find me Bunce!’ ‘Oh dear,’ one of the parrots remarked, kicking the husk of a nut out of its cage. ‘Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear.’ I waited, standing my ground as I listened to the cries for Bunce echo around the school like calls for courtroom witnesses. During tea I had looked across at Bunce’s table from time to time. He had been

78 listlessly pushing fried bread into his mouth like a condemned man who has chosen the wrong last breakfast. When he had looked up and happened to catch my eye, his cheeks had blazed scarlet but his head had nodded emphatically up and down and his mouth had formed the word ‘Yes’. I had no doubts about my Bunce. Bunce was brave and Bunce was true. Within three minutes Bunce was beside me on the carpet in Cromie’s study, his hands behind his back, his mouth set in a firm line, but his legs wobbling hopelessly in their shorts. ‘Bunce,’ said Cromie, sweetly, ‘Fry tells me that... This was as far as he managed to get. The dam burst and the torrent filled the room. ‘Sir, it’s true, sir. I went to the village shop, sir. I went. I did. I did go there. Fry went. I didn’t. I mean, I went, Fry didn’t. I went to the village shop, not Fry. I got the sweets for him. He didn’t buy any. It was me. I bought them all. I went to the village shop. I went to the village shop. I did...’ All this came at a pace that made Cromie blink with astonishment. It ended in a howling cyclone of weeping that embarrassed us all. ‘Fry, get out,’ said Cromie. ‘Sir, does that mean...?’ ‘Just go. Wait outside. I shall call for you later.’ As I closed the door I heard Bunce’s voice squeaking out the words, ‘It is true, sir. Every word. I went to the village shop and I’m so sorry, sir, I shan’t ever again...’ There were too many people milling about to allow me to stay near and eavesdrop. The great cry for Bunce had fascinated the school. ‘What’s up, Fry?’ everyone wanted to know. I shrugged my shoulders as if I didn’t care and walked to the end of the corridor down towards the ships. Higher up the wall, above the Hood and the Dreadnought, or the Invincible and the Repulse or whatever they were, were wooden panels where the gilt names of scholars and other great achievers had been painted. I stood and looked at them. Le Poidevin, Winship, Mallett, de Vere, Hodge, Martineau and Hazell. I wondered for a brief second if my name would ever be up there, but dismissed the idea at once. I knew that it would never be. This was a list of the names of those who had joined in. They had gone on from being captains of rugger and captains of cricket to being captains of school and captains of industry. I wondered if, in a phrase that Major Dobson loved, they had also become Masters of their Fate and Captains of their Soul. ‘Are you a Major of your Soul then, sir, and is that better than being a Captain of your Soul?’ I remember I had asked him this once when he had read that Whitman poem to us and he had smiled cheerily at the question. I had loved Major Dobson because he had been a good teacher and because, in that strange and inappropriate way that children have, I had felt sorry for him. I think my mother had taken me to see a production of Rattigan’s Separate Tables at the Maddermarket Theatre in Norwich when I was quite young, and since then I had always associated Majors with disappointment, regret and, that awful phrase, ‘passed over’. ‘Not bad for a passed-over Major...’ Colonel Ross says to Major Dolby in The Ipcress File. In fact, I now know, Major Dobson had been captured by the Germans with the British Expeditionary Force at Dunkirk. He then escaped and fought throughout the war

79 right up through Sicily and Italy. True to the old cliché, he never talked about it. No more than did Mr Bruce who had spent the war years in a Japanese internment camp and taught History and Divinity with the panache and brio of an ancient fabulist. Being fiercely Scottish, the history he taught with such passion was of William Wallace, the Montrose Rebellion and the Jacobite Wars of 1715 and 1745. I have special reason to bless Jim Bruce as you will discover later. I discovered these and other biographical details only two weeks ago when Ant Cromie kindly sent me a list of answers to a cartload of questions about Stouts Hill. Charles Knight, who taught me Latin and Greek and looked like Crippen the murderer but was the kindest and gentlest man who ever taught me, a man who loved to teach, had no interest in discipline or punishment whatsoever, and took immense pride in my taking the school’s Senior Greek Prize when I was twelve (I have it still, the collected works of John Keats) — he fought in the desert and in Italy too. I remember so clearly history lessons that involved the war, I remember its universal fascination to all of us, for all that it had ended twelve or thirteen years before we were born. Almost every boy in the school could identify the silhouette of a Dornier and a Heinkel and draw Hurricanes, Spitfires and Panzer tanks. Yet not once do I remember a single master refer to war as a personal experience. I would have bombarded, strafed and sniped them with questions, had I known. It puzzles me still, this silence of old soldiers. Looking up at the names of the old boys always. made me think of the war. Although the school had only been founded in 1935, those names above the ships looked like the names of the war dead, they shared that same melancholy permanence. A contemporary school roll, however outré or grand the names, always sounds perky and chipper; the school roll of a generation ago has the sombre muffled note of a funeral bell. I had not been staring up at le Poidevin and Winship and Mallett for long before I saw, reflected in the glass case of the ships, the study door open at the end of the corridor. I turned. Cromie stood in the doorway and beckoned with a single curling finger. I walked down the corridor jauntily. Somehow, I knew the game was up. I think too that I knew that it was right that it was up. Like a scared mutt darting out from between his master’s legs, Bunce shot from the study and rocketed down the corridor towards me. I caught the rolling whites of his eyes as he passed and thought I heard a panted word, which may have been ‘Sorry’. As I approached Cromie and the open study door he turned to the six or seven boys who were hanging around, pretending to talk to the parrots and examine the pictures on the walls. ‘What are you lot doing here?’ he yelled. ‘Nothing better to do? Want some extra work?’ They fled in instant silent panic. Now there was only me in the corridor, walking towards Cromie who was framed against the doorway, his outline dark against the window at the back of his study. The corridor seemed to be getting longer and longer, as in some truth-drug induced hallucination scene in The Avengers or Man in a Suitcase. Still his finger seemed to beckon, still every step that I took seemed to take me further from him. When the door did close behind us the room was deadly quiet and the sounds of the school could not be heard. Even the parrots and the mynah bird had fallen into silence.

80 Cromie turned towards the window where the shutters were. The shutters that housed the canes. ‘Of course you know,’ said Cromie with a sigh, ‘that I am going to beat you, don’t you, Fry?’ I nodded and licked my lips. ‘I would just like to believe,’ he went on, ‘that you know why.’ I nodded again. ‘To go to the village shop is one thing. To send a boy like Bunce to go in your place is quite another. Let us not fool ourselves. Bunce would never have gone unless at your bidding. If you can see how cowardly that is, how vile and low and cowardly, then perhaps there is a scintilla of hope for you.’ That was the first time, I remember, that I ever heard the word ‘scintilla’. It is funny how the exact meaning of a new word can be so precisely understood in all its connotations, just from its first hearing. ‘Eight strokes, I think,’ said Cromie. ‘The most I have ever given. I hope never to have to give so many again.’ Bunce never forgave himself, in all the time I knew him, for letting me down. He remained convinced that somehow he could have played it better. He should have swaggered, acted the part of the real, wicked, dyed-in-the-wool village-shopper. I wanted to hug him for his sweetness. Just a great hug to reward such goodness of nature. I wanted to hug myself too. I wanted to hug myself for fooling Cromie. He still didn’t get it. Still didn’t know the real truth. I had stolen his sweets, stolen money from his pupils and verbally tortured a fine child into lying for me. And all I had been beaten for was the schoolmasterly crime of being a ‘bad influence’. The boys of Cundall Manor School loved me to tell them that story when I was a schoolmaster in the late 1970s. I didn’t paint myself in quite the terrible colours I should have done, I left out the parts involving real theft, but otherwise I told it as it was and they loved it. ‘Tell it again, sir. The story of you and Bunce... go on, sir!’ And I would light my pipe and tell them. * I look back now at Stouts Hill, closed during my first term at Cambridge, and I shake my head at the person I was. The child was more malevolent, I think, than the adolescent, because at least the adolescent had love as an excuse. All the child wanted was to tear at sweets with his teeth. It never quite managed to move with the times, Stouts Hill. Ant Cromie was ambitious and built a fine theatre. But he never liked the idea of too many day boys. The fees were high, the uniform remained fabulously classy and meanwhile the parents became less interested in ponies and Greek and more interested in Common Entrance results and money. They had voted Mrs Thatcher in and they voted out Cloud the pony and the boathouse and the lake and the old Majors and Commanders. On my bookshelf I still have a copy of Fitzroy Maclean’s Eastern Approaches, lent to me by Paddy Angus’s

81 husband, Ian. I really must send it back to him some time. Fitzroy Maclean is dead now and so is Stouts Hill. I wonder what those who have used it as a Time Share Facility make of the place. I wonder if I left any guilt and shame in the air? I wonder if Bunce’s grief at his own goodness is soaked into the walls? I was happy there. Which is to say I was not unhappy there. Unhappiness and happiness I have always been able to carry about with me, irrespective of place and people, because I have never joined in.

82 Falling In 1 UPPINGHAM SCHOOL was founded in the reign of Queen Elizabeth the First, but like most public schools did nothing but doze lazily where it was, in the cute little county of Rutland, deep in prime hunting country, until the nineteenth century when a great pioneering headmaster, as great pioneering headmasters will, kicked it up the backside and into a brief blaze of glory. Uppingham’s great pioneering headmaster was Edward Thing and one must suppose he had some connection with Gabbitas and Thring, the scholastic agency. Certainly Edward Thring founded the Head-masters’ Conference, the public schools’ defining body. Even today, if you are not a member of the HMC you are not a public school, merely an Independent. Thring believed, like all Victorian pioneering headmasters, in simply enormous side- whiskers and in the Whole Boy. Uppingham School, under his command, was the first public school in Britain to build a swimming pool. Thring encouraged the development of carpentry, woodwork, pottery, printing and crafts. He believed that every child had a talent and that it was the duty of the school to find it. If a boy was a duffer at Latin, Greek or the Mathematics, Thring argued, then something else must be found at which he could excel, for Every Boy Is Good At Something. Edward Thing had wider and more substantial sideburns by far than Thomas Arnold of Rugby School, but Uppingham had no Webb Ellis to invent a new field game and no Thomas Hughes to invent a new literary genre, and thus, despite the staggering impressiveness of Thring’s whiskers, that flew from his cheeks like banners of flame, Uppingham never quite attained Rugby’s heights of fame and glory and throughout the passage of the twentieth century it slowly floated down to its current middle level of middle-class, middle-brow, middle-England middledom. The English have a positive mania for attaching the word ‘philosophy’ to the most rudimentary and banal platitudes: ‘Our philosophy is to please the customer’, ‘do as you would be done by, that’s my philosophy,’ ‘a blend of traditional comfort and modern convenience is very much the Thistle Hotel’s philosophy,’ that kind of nonsense. The word gets its most savage mistreatment in the mouths of that peculiarly pompous animal, the public school headmaster, that creature so ruthlessly and brilliantly slaughtered, stuffed, mounted and put on permanent display by Peter Jeffrey in Lindsay Anderson’s film masterpiece If... The public school headmaster and the public school prospectus use the word ‘philosophy’ much as Californian Valley Girls use the word ‘like’, ceaselessly and senselessly. It was Very Much Uppingham’s Philosophy, for example, to apply the precepts and principles of Edward Thring to the modern world. In other words, they had added a metalwork division and a screen-printing room to the carpentry shop.

83 It was Very Much Uppingham’s Philosophy to develop the potential of every pupil. In other words, the school’s A-level results and Oxbridge success rate were well below the average. It was Very Much Uppingham’s Philosophy (even in my day unironically expressed) to turn out polite, cheerful, all-round chaps. In other words the average Uppinghamian is a well-mannered, decent fellow with a stout heart but not too much between the ears. If all this sounds like mocking criticism, it is not meant to. Well-mannered, decent fellows with stout hearts and not too much between the ears were the gravy and potatoes of two world wars. The well-maintained memorials in Uppingham catalogue a greater roll of the dead than the size of the school warrants. If other, smarter schools provided the brilliant generals and tacticians who moved counters on maps at Staff HQ, then Uppingham served up the gallant young fellows who sprang so cheerfully and so unquestioningly up the trench ladders, leading their men into the certainty of muddy, bloody slaughter. What is more, Uppinghamians who survived would never be so unsporting or so tasteless as to write clever sceptical poetry about the experience afterwards. There is a word which still means much to the English and which was for many years a rod for my back, a spur to prick the sides of my intent, a Fury from which to flee, a nemesis, an enemy, an anathema, a totem, a bugaboo and an accusation. I still recoil at its usage and its range of connotation. The word stands for everything I have always wanted not to be and everything and everyone I have felt apart from. It is the shibboleth of the club I would never join, could never join, the club outside whose doors I might stand jeering, while all the time a secret part of me watched with wretched self-loathing as the elected members pushed through the revolving doors, whistling, happy and self-assured. The word is HEALTHY — a word that needs some unpicking. Its meaning derives from whole and hale and is cognitively related to such words as holy and healing. Heal is to weal (as the Eleven Plus might say) as health is to wealth. To be healthy is to be whole and holy. To be unhealthy is to be unclean and unholy, insanitary and insane. For the English the words healthy and hale, at their best, used to carry the full-bellied weight of florid good cheer, cakes and ale, halidom and festive Falstaffian winter wassail. By the end of the seventeenth century, the hale health of pagan holiday was expelled from the feasting-hall along with Falstaff and Sir Toby Belch by the sombre holy day piety and po-faced puritanism of Malvolio, Milton and Prynne. ‘Health!’ became no longer a bumping boozer’s toast but a quality of the immortal soul. Health no longer went with heartiness, but with purity. ‘For your soul’s health’s sake.. .‘ said the priest. Thomas Arnold, and behind him Edward Thring and a squadron of other great Victorian pioneering headmasters, whiskers flowing in the breeze, found a new meaning for health. They twisted a poor Roman satirist’s cynical hope into the maxim of the Muscular Christian: Mens sana in corpore sano.

84 ‘A healthy body makes a healthy mind,’ became the wilfully syllogistic mistranslation upon which a 'philosophy’ was founded. Cleanliness, generation upon generation of Britons were led to believe, was next to godliness. Health of body was to be looked upon as an outward and visible sign, to misappropriate the glorious poetry of the Eucharist, of an inward and spiritual health. Thring had some reason to believe in Health, where health meant hygiene. During his headmastership of Uppingham School he had become infuriated by Uppingham Town’s refusal to do something about its sewers, whose antiquity and medieval inefficiency were causing regular outbreaks of typhus and typhoid amongst pupils and staff. With the furious energy and implacable will of all great Victorians, he moved the entire school hundreds of miles away to the seaside village of Borth in Wales until such time as Uppingham’s local economy suffered enough to force its burghers to do something about their sanitation and, literally, to clean up their act. Thring and the school returned in triumph to a hygienic Uppingham and the school’s Borthday is annually celebrated still. It is one thing to build sanitation systems that inhibit the breeding of unhealthy bacteria and bacilli, but it is another to build educational systems that inhibit the breeding of unhealthy ideas and beliefs. Besides, while we can universally agree that cholera, typhus and typhoid are unhealthy we are unable to come anywhere close to consensus as to the healthiness or otherwise of ideas. I suppose today, the fashionable word to apply is ‘meme’, the evolutionary scientist’s new buzz-word, a concept that applies the model of the selfish gene and the greedily self-replicating virus to movements in thought, to philosophies, religions, political tendencies, trends in individualism and sexual licence, to growth, development, change and ideo-diversity in everything from the rights of animals to the rights of man. One model is as good as another, but today’s memologists kid themselves if they think they were the first to look on ideas as diseases. Their twist is to call religion the virus, where their predecessors looked on atheism, humanism and free- thinking as the contagions. Scientists bring the pure neutrality of φυσις and the beautiful self-working holiness of nature to bear upon the problem. Their grandfathers, Charles Darwin s furious contemporaries, invoked the Bible, the edicts of Empire and that curious Victorian morality that believed worthiness to be the same as worth and healthiness the same as health. The religiosity of the public schools had sown into it, praise the Lord, the seeds of its own destruction, for the cornerstone of public school education was a study of the languages of classical antiquity, Latin and Greek, and a study of the classics leads the alert reader away from the revealed claims of ecclesiasticism and towards the beauty and holiness of Socrates, Plato and Lucretius. Uppingham School has very few alumni of whom it can boast in terms of that fell whore, Fame. The odd politician (Stephen Dorrell being the current foremost example), the even odder explorer and eccentric (the Campbells, Donald and Malcolm, for example) an odd actor or two (William Henry Pratt was in my House and achieved eternal glory under the wisely altered name of Boris Karloff), the great director John Schlesinger was there too, but very few writers and artists. Indeed the best known writers to have attended Uppingham include a most exotic trio of early twentieth-century minors. James Elroy Flecker for example, a poet and dramatist whose best known work Hassan was set to incidental music by Delius and contains splendid mock Arabian felicities like, ‘Shall I then put down the needle of insinuation and pick up the club of statement?’ and the

85 couplet that should be the motto of every unhealthy schoolboy: For lust of knowing what should not be known, We take the Golden Road to Samarkand. Flecker’s contemporary at Uppingham was the exotic Arthur Annesley, better known as Ronald Firbank, whose books included Vainglory, Valmouth and Sorrow in the Sunlight, unfortunately retitled as Prancing Nigger. Firbank remains even today near the top of the essential reading list of every well-read literary queen. He was a great favourite of ‘better’ writers like Evelyn Waugh, Aldous Huxley and Ivy Compton-Burnett, and his writing exemplifies par excellence that style of poisonous, luxuriant prose that Cyril Connolly defined as the Mandarin. As E. M. Forster wrote of him and his louche created world of birettas, lace-stays and pomanders, ‘Is he affected? Yes always ... Is he himself healthy? Perish the thought!’ A little older, but longer-lived than either, was Norman Douglas, the third of the Uppingham triumvirate, and at one time a kind of literary and social hero to me and a writer whose first editions I still collect to this day. Here is something that Douglas wrote about Uppingham in his 1933 memoir Looking Back. A mildewy scriptural odour pervaded the institution — it reeked of Jereboam and Jesus; the masters struck me as supercilious humbugs; the food was so vile that for the first day or two after returning from holidays I could not get it down. The only good which ever came out of the place was cheese from the neighbouring Stilton, and that, of course, they never gave us. And the charges... On my mother’s death I found, among her papers, those Uppingham accounts: God, how they swindled her! I daresay all -that is changed now. The mildewy scriptural odour and that reek of Jereboam and Jesus still sometimes hung in the air around the more solid Victorian buildings of Uppingham during my time there and we were certainly never fed on Stilton, but otherwise the place had certainly, as Douglas dared say, changed. The fees were, and still are, steeper than those of many schools with better reputations, but I don’t think it could be accused of swindling. Most of the masters struck me as supercilious humbugs too, but then schoolmasters always strike cocky adolescents as supercilious humbugs. If anyone was a supercilious humbug it was most certainly me. What I adored about Douglas and about Firbank is that they were, as Forster said UNHEALTHY The black bombazine bombast of their Victorian childhoods and educations gave those two writers a deep yearning for light, colour, exoticism and the pagan, in Firbank’s case the Marian paganism of the Romish church, in Douglas’s the real paganism of dryads, fauns and the Great God Pan. They strove instinctively for a style that is the antithesis of blackness and bombast and the best word for that style is not Connolly’s Mandarin, but Camp. What is camp? A much misunderstood word. Everyone has their own feel for it, here is mine. Camp is not in rugby football.

86 Camp is not in the Old Testament. Camp is not in St Paul. Camp is not in Latin lessons, though it might be in Greek. Camp loves colour. Camp loves light. Camp takes pleasure in the surface of things. Camp loves paint as much as it loves paintings. Camp prefers style to the stylish. Camp is pale. Camp is unhealthy. Camp is not English, damn it. But... Camp is not kitsch. Camp is not drag. Camp is not nearly so superficial as it would have you believe. Camp casts out all fear. Camp is strong. Camp is healthy. And, let’s face it... Camp is queer. (Mostly) How much a sensitive heterosexual boy is drawn to the silks, the light, the paganism, the poison and the luxury of camp, is a question. How much a straight boy needs an alternative world, that too is a question. If he does need one, it is more easily found ready- made in the contemporary outside of rock and roll, sport, cars and girls. So easily found that it is not really an alternative world at all, merely one that is just different enough in emphasis from that of the older generation to enable the youth to feel rebellious and rorty. A boy who knows that he is other, who knows that the world is not made for him, who reads the code implicit in words like ‘healthy’ and ‘decent’, he may well be drawn to the glaring light and savage dark of the ancient world and the poisonous colours and heavy, dangerous musks that lie the other side of the door into the secret garden, the door held open by Pater, Wilde, Douglas, Firbank ... even Forster himself, missish and prim as he could be. Without the ‘benefits’ of a classical education, a boy growing up knowing his difference, might in my day, have been drawn to The Wizard of Oz, Cabaret, musicals, glam rock and fashion. Today the gayboy in every section of society has a world of gay music, dance and television to endorse his identity. Manchester has its gay village, London has Old Compton Street, the gay world meets daily to chat, cruise and invigorate itself on the internet. They don’t need a parcel of old poofs historically sequestered in

87 Capri and Tangier to tell them who they are and where they come from and whether or not they have the right to hold their heads up high. I did need them, however. I needed them desperately and without them I am not sure what I would have done to myself. Queers are not the only unhealthy people to contaminate English society of course. There are Jews too. I never much cared about my jewishness as a boy. The arbitrary oddity of difference between the western patronymic custom and the primacy of maternal bloodlines in Judaism meant that, by virtue of surname, I passed as gentile. My father’s family name of Fry was as old English as could be, steeped in Quakerism as far back as the founding of the movement. John Fry, a parliamentarian ancestor, signed King Charles the First’s death warrant. My Great Uncle George wrote a book called The Saxon Origins of the Fry Family as a counterblast to those heretical relations (the chocolate making swine from Bristol) who believed that they originated from the town of Fry in Normandy. The opening words of Uncle George’s disappointingly little read work are: Unlike many so-called English families, the Frys did not come over with William the Conqueror in 1066 —they were there to meet him when he arrived. My mother might be entirely Jewish, but my surname is entirely English, and that made all the difference to me in terms of my perceived identity. To the English it meant I was English, with faintly exotic overtones, to the Jews it meant I was Jewish, with only a venial blemish. I had, that is to say, the best of both worlds. There are plenty of children in Britain with Jewish fathers and gentile mothers who therefore count as non-Jews to the Jewish, but whose surnames being Goldberg, Cohen or Feinstein, find themselves being treated by the British, in Jonathan Miller’s phrase, as the Whole Hog. Besides, I don’t really, so far as I can tell, look especially Jewish and these things too, make a difference. I only remember three other Jewish boys at Uppingham: their names were Adley, Heilbronn and Green. Their jewishness was probably of greater importance to them than mine was to me. I used my mixed blood as a vague extra element of exoticism about which I could boast, for there was no palpable anti-Semitism at Uppingham — just the usual careless use of the words ‘jew’ or ‘jewy’ applied to anybody to indicate meanness with money, no more than that. I have feelings about English anti-Semitism that are as mixed as my own blood. Those members of my mother’s family who survived the holocaust went to live, with the single exception of my grandfather, in America or Israel. In conversation with them I would get very hot under the collar when they shook their heads wonderingly at my grandfather’s decision to live in what they regarded as such an anti-Semitic country as England. ‘What about Benjamin Disraeli?’ I would retort. ‘He was Prime Minister over a hundred years ago. He gave Queen Victoria the Suez Canal and the title of Empress. He died an Earl. When’s the first Jewish President of the United States going to be sworn in?’ I would conveniently forget to add, of course, that Disraeli’s father had converted to Christianity. ‘Or look at Rufus Isaacs,’ I would say. ‘Presidents and potentates would have to bow and call him Your Highness when he was Viceroy of India. He died a Marquess. Half of Margaret Thatcher’s cabinet is Jewish. The New York Athletic Club didn’t allow Jews in as members until a few years ago. Can you imagine such low, brash

88 vulgarity in a London club?’ Very self-righteous and patriotic I would be. They might respond with talk about the British wartime reluctance to believe in the depths into which Nazi anti-Semitism had sunk and their handling of the Palestinian Mandate. This is not an argument I feel qualified to pursue. There is no doubt in my mind, however, that there is a kind of anti-Semitism peculiar to Britain. I have mentioned before the use of the word clever and with what particularity it is applied to men like Jonathan Miller and Freddie Raphael. Jews, like homosexuals, are not quite healthy. They are part of that parade of pale, clever men who, at the turn of the century, confused the healthy world with all that talk of relativism and doubt and those weird ideas about determinant history and the divided self. Einstein, Marx and Freud took the old healthy guilt that sprang from Eden and the Cross and which Western Culture had somehow successfully purged of jewishness and gave us a whole new suite of guilts that a good cold shower and a game of rugger couldn’t quite cleanse. Indeed, the perverted swine would probably look at that cold shower and that game of rugger and read all kinds of nasty things into them, the kind of nasty things that only a pale, unhealthy kind of outsider could possibly see. They’ll read anything into the most innocent of pastimes, these Jews and these pansies. Reading things into things, if that isn’t the favourite hobby of the intellectual I don’t know what is. Come to think, dim stirrings of old Latin lessons here, doesn’t intellectual actually mean ‘reading into’? There you are then. People nowadays can’t look a plain thing in the face and call it plainly what it is. Intellectuals to the left of us, intellectuals to the right, reading. Beastly, unhealthy swine. Well, no one talks in quite that John Buchaneering way any more, but the modes of thought are still there, or rather modes of anti-thought: still there, still present and incorrect. The Jews still manage, in some people’s eyes, that supremely clever trick of being to blame both for capitalism and its excesses through their control of banks and financial institutions and for socialism and the liberal consensus that threatens the very stability of capitalism and the free market. It’s their bloody torah and their damnable talmud, simply encourages too much of reading things into things and too much smug rabbinical clever-clever cleverness. The Uppingham mind certainly was not trained to read too much into things. Those schoolmasters with imaginations and intellects had enough to do to get the boys through 0 level examinations without worrying their heads with real ideas: they did their best, but it is easy to forget how much more powerful is the corporate mentality of schoolboys than the individual intellect of a schoolmaster. It was easier for the boys to brand a schoolmaster pretentious than it was for a master to call a boy unimaginative. Indeed, I can remember endless arguments (see, there’s another thing you Jews are always doing ... arguing) with other boys about that great sin of ‘reading too much into things’. It is a cliché amongst healthy schoolboys to say, ‘You can read anything into anything. Bloody hell, all this Shakespeare stuff. I mean they read too much into it. In Braddy’s English set today, you won’t believe it, but he was going on about bloody Hamlet and his mother and he used the word “Freudian” about them. . . I mean, Jesus, how stupid can you get? Doesn’t he realise Freud wasn’t born until hundreds of years later? Shakespeare couldn’t have known anything about Oedipus complexes and all that rubbish. I can’t believe our parents pay men like that to talk such pseudy wank.’ It’s mean to attack so hopeless a brand of feeble stupidity or mock so terrible a lack





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




89 of imagination, in the end it is its own tragic handicap, and those who go to the grave unilluminated by the light of ideas are the sufferers, but of course I didn’t know that then, I thought such Philistines were already the victors and that the life of the mind and the imagination was under threat from all sides. Besides I was a terrible show off and I used to react angrily, with great moral fervour and all the jewy, pansy strength of my wicked tongue. Not that argument could ever swerve the stolid Uppinghamian mind away from his settled conviction that art, literature and the play of ideas were anything more than ‘wank’. Indeed, the better one argued, the more it proved it was all words, words, words. ‘Oh, you can argue anything with words, Fry. Doesn’t make it right.’ It is one of the great ironies of British (anti-) intellectual life that a nebulous sense of twentieth-century relativism has taken hold, somewhere deep down, and is used to damn and distrust the logical and the rational. Thus a point of view about art can be dismissed as ‘pretentious’ and ‘wank’ — in other words, as not solid, not real, ‘airy-fairy’ and ‘arty- farty’ — while at the same time any logical, rational defence of it is dismissed as ‘just opinion’ or ‘semantics’ in a world in which, ‘let’s face it, everything is relative, anyway...' I wished that Forster’s 1934 obituary of the art critic Roger Fry (no relation so far as I know) could be mine... I can’t think of a better encomium. What characterized him and made him so precious in twentieth-century England was that, although he was a modern, he believed in reason... [He] rejected authority, mistrusted intuition. That is why his loss is so irreparable... If you said to him ‘This must be right, all the experts say so ... Hitler says so, Marx says so, Christ says so, The Times says so,’ he would reply in effect, ‘Well. I wonder. Let’s see.’ He would see and he would make you see. You would come away realizing that an influential opinion may be influentially backed and yet be tripe... Intuition he did not reject. He knew that it is part of our equipment, and the sensitiveness he valued in himself and in others is connected with it. But he also knew that it can make dancing dervishes of us all, and that the man who believes a thing is true because he feels it in his bones, is not really very far removed from the man who believes it on the authority of a policeman’s truncheon. Forster, in other words, is talking about a classical mind, a Greek mind. It is so ironic that classical education, English style, produced nothing but anti-classical attitudes. The English public schoolboy product can easily live out his whole life believing that imagination is the same thing as fantasy, that ideas are deceptive ornament and that ornament itself is supernumerary to life’s requirements, he reflects absolutely our age of unreason: the plodding and carefully plotted lines of Nuffield empiricism are fine, but inference is to be distrusted. He lives between the extremes of the revealed truths of convention and current morality on the one side, and the vague, ignorant madness of a misunderstood sense of relativism, opinion and New Age finger-wagging-more-things-in- heaven-and earth Horatio-ism on the other, confusing mysteriousness with mysticism, and relativism with the idea that any view is up for grabs without the need for the winnowing processes of logic, reason and personal experience. Catastrophe, breakdown, marital disaster, personal tragedy, injustice or abuse are often the only crises that drop the scales from their eyes. I speak as such a product myself, you must understand, not as one looking down from a Heliconian height. For, in spite of all my differences, such as they are, I was never fully the sensitive outsider, the rejected Jew, the outrageous queen or the distanced intellectual that I liked to picture myself to be. I was never quite as intelligent as I thought I was, never quite as bold in my refusal to be conventional, never quite as alienated by my sexuality, never quite as

90 sure of my belonging to the inner life of art and the mind. I absorbed the lessons of E. M. Forster readily and greedily. I collected him in first edition as avidly as I collected Norman Douglas. It is worth quoting almost in full that famous passage that hovers above all this. It is taken from ‘Notes on the English Character’, the first essay in his 1936 collection Abinger Harvest, whence also came the lines on Roger Fry and Firbank. Note One is that the character of the English is essentially middle-class; after a little historical explanation as to why that might be safely stated, Forster continues: Solidity, caution, integrity, efficiency. Lack of imagination, hypocrisy. These qualities characterize the middle classes in every country, but in England they are national characteristics also, because only in England have the middle classes been in power for one hundred and fifty years. Napoleon, in his rude way, called us ‘a nation of shopkeepers.’ We prefer to call ourselves ‘a great commercial nation’ — it sounds more dignified — but the two phrases amount to the same. The Second Note contains that famous phrase ‘the undeveloped heart’. Second Note. Just as the heart of England is the middle classes, so the heart of the middle classes is the public- school system ... How perfectly it expresses their character — far better, for instance, than does the university, into which social and spiritual complexities have already entered. With its boarding-houses, its compulsory games, its system of prefects and fagging, its insistence on good form and esprit de corps, it produces a type whose weight is out of all proportion to its numbers... And they go forth [the public-school boys] into a world that is not entirely composed of public-school men or even of Anglo-Saxons, but of men who are as various as the sands of the sea; into a world of whose richness and subtlety they have no conception. They go forth into it with well developed bodies, fairly developed minds and undeveloped hearts ... An undeveloped heart, not a cold one. The difference is important... Once upon a time (this is an anecdote) I went for a holiday on the Continent with an Indian friend. We both enjoyed ourselves and were sorry when the week was over, but on parting our behaviour was absolutely different. He was plunged in despair... I could not see what there was to make a fuss about... ‘Buck up,’ I said, ‘do buck up.’ He refused to buck up, and I left him plunged in gloom. The conclusion of the anecdote is even more instructive. For when we met the next month our conversation threw a good deal of light on the English character. I began by scolding my friend. I told him that he had been wrong to feel and display so much emotion upon so slight an occasion; that it was inappropriate. The word ‘inappropriate’ roused him to fury. ‘What?’ he cried. ‘Do you measure out your emotions as if they were potatoes?’ I did not like the simile of the potatoes, but after a moment’s reflection I said, ‘Yes, I do; and what’s more I think I ought to. A small occasion demands a little emotion, just as a large emotion demands a great one. I would like my emotions to be appropriate. This may be measuring them like potatoes, but it is better than slopping them about like water from a pail, which is what you did.’ He did not like the simile of the pail. ‘If those are your opinions, they part us forever,’ he cried, and left the room. Returning immediately, he added: ‘No — but your whole attitude toward emotion is wrong. Emotion has nothing to do with appropriateness. It matters only that it shall be sincere. I happened to feel deeply. I showed it. It doesn’t matter whether I ought to have felt deeply or not.’ This remark impressed me very much. Yet I could not agree with it, and said that I valued emotion as much as he did, but used it differently; if I poured it out on small occasions I was afraid of having none left for the great ones, and of being bankrupt at the crises of life. Note the word ‘bankrupt.’ I spoke as a member of a prudent middle-class nation, always anxious to meet my liabilities. But my friend spoke as an Oriental... he feels his resources are endless, just as John Bull feels his are finite. This is how Forster finishes. ... the English character is incomplete in a way that is particularly annoying to the foreign observer. It has a bad surface — self-complacent, unsympathetic, and reserved. There is plenty of emotion further down, but it never gets used. There is plenty of brain power, but it is more often used to confirm prejudices than to dispel them. With such an equipment the Englishman cannot be popular. Only I would repeat: there is little vice in him and no real coldness. It is the machinery that is wrong. I hope and believe myself that in the next twenty years [this was written in 1920] we shall see a great change, and the national character will alter into something which is less unique but more loveable. The supremacy of the

91 middle-classes is probably ending. What new element the working classes will introduce one cannot say, but at all events they will not have been educated at public schools... The nations must understand one another, and quickly; and without the interposition of their governments, for the shrinkage of the globe is throwing us into one another’s arms. To that understanding these notes are a feeble contribution —notes on the English character as it has struck a novelist. Well, have we seen ‘a great change’? Has the supremacy of the middle-classes ended? In a pig’s arse has it ended. Even today, mutatis mutandis, the character of the English is defined by the character of its (still rising) middle-classes and even today, the character of those middle classes is defined by the character of the (still disproportionately) powerful public-school product. The schools of course have changed, to the extent that public schoolboys wear baseball caps and expensive Nike footwear, listen to rap music, raise the pitch of their voices at the end of sentences in that bizarre Australian Question Intonation picked up from the TV soaps, and say ‘Cool’ and ‘Slamming’ a lot. That is nauseating certainly, embarrassing obviously, but fundamentally it alters nothing. No one can seriously suggest that the average English public schoolboy emerges from his school with a South Central Los Angeles sensibility, or the outlook, soul and character of an unemployed working-class spot-welder. The body is probably even better developed, the brain as fairly developed but the heart just as undeveloped. The British have always absorbed cultural influences without losing their character. After all Humphrey Lyttelton and his generation listened to black jazz at Eton in the 19308 and probably called their friends ‘cats’ and ‘daddy-o’. In our day we said that things were ‘far out’ and ‘like, wow ... ‘ but it altered our Englishness not a whit. Plus ça change... It is worth remarking, I suppose, that the Indian ‘friend’ Forster referred to in his Notes was, of course, a lover; also worth remarking that Forster never points out that his impression of the English character was not only middle-class and public-school, but also male. On that subject it so happens that the first edition of Abinger Harvest that I possess once belonged to the historian R. W. Ketton-Cremer who retained in its pages a pristine clipping from the Sunday Times of March 22nd, 1936 containing a review of the book by the eminent critic Desmond MacCarthy — in those days there really were such things as eminent reviewers. MacCarthy makes the following delicate point with great perspicacity and elegance. His [Forster’s] peculiar balance of qualities is more often found in woman than in man; and if I could be confident of not being misunderstood by those who consider intellect a masculine speciality, I would add that his view- point... both as a critic and a creator, is feminine rather than masculine ... Absurdities and tragedies, he seems to be saying are due to the failure to link experiences together — to connect. That is Mr Forster’s “message.” Now, the essentially masculine way of taking life is to handle it departmentally. A man says to himself: there is my home and my private life of personal relations; there is my business, my work; there is my life as a citizen. In each department he has principles according to which situations can be handled as they arise. But in each department these are different. His art of life is to disconnect; it simplifies problems... The feminine impulse, on the other hand, whether on account of women’s education or her fundamental nature, is to see life as more of a continuum. That is part of what I meant by saying that Mr Forster, as a creative writer and as a critic, takes the feminine viewpoint. Intuiting, and finally knowing for sure that Forster was somehow, like me — Not As Other Boys —allowed me to form a more natural bond with him as a writer than I might otherwise have done. Certainly ‘Notes on the English Character’ and later Howard’s End became sacred texts for me at Uppingham, together with Cyril Connolly’s perfect

92 Enemies of Promise and its Theory of Permanent Adolescence: It is the theory that the experiences undergone by boys at the great public schools, their glories and disappointments, are so intense as to dominate their lives and to arrest their development. From these it results that the greater part of the ruling class remains adolescent, school-minded, self-conscious, cowardly, sentimental, and in the last analysis homosexual. It was difficult for me to know quite how to handle that. On the one hand I believed that I was made homosexual the day I was born, on the other I loved the idea that it was School’s Fault and that I was the victim of a wicked and corrupt system. Connolly, one sees now, meant socially as much as erotically homosexual, hence ‘the last analysis’ — but there were days when, unhappy with my sexual lot, I liked to blame my education for my nature. Ihab Hassan, as so often, is right on the money when he says in The Anti- Hero: The ambivalences of a bourgeois hero in an overwhelmingly middle-class society raise for him problems of estrangement and communion, sincerity and simulation, ambition and acquiescence ... The sad history of the anti- hero is nothing more than the history of man’s changing awareness of himself. It is the record of his recoil ... Man, meanwhile, goes clowning his sentimental way into eternity. It can come a bit hard sometimes to see one’s own unique, heroic life pinned so pitilessly to a wall. At other times it can endorse, affirm and save, but as I go clowning my sentimental way into eternity, wrestling with all my problems of estrangement and com- munion, sincerity and simulation, ambition and acquiescence, I shuttle between worrying whether I matter at all and whether anything else matters at all but me. I am sorry to borrow from others so much, but to do it one last time, I bring Montaigne to my defence: I quote others only the better to express myself. Just in case you get the impression that from the age of thirteen onwards I spent all my time sitting in libraries reading Cyril Connolly, Michel de Montaigne (the fabulous edition translated by the fabulously named M. A. Screech was not available then), E. M. Forster, Ronald Firbank and Ihab Hassan, I should say that I have conflated and compressed time here. None of this reading, none of this connecting or identifying with literature or the lives of others took place until the great event happened — the great event of my falling in love. Until that time I read a huge amount of Sherlock Holmes and P. G. Wodehouse, Talbot Baines Reed and G. Henty, Alastair Maclean and Agatha Christie, Biggles and Buchan, Hammond Innes and Len Deighton, Dornford Yates and Dorothy Sayers. What is more, I still do. 2 I believe Stouts Hill wanted me to leave them as early as possible. I had sat for the Uppingham scholarship examination aged twelve and failed to receive an award. I came close enough to an exhibition for Uppingham to recommend me to try for the exam again at a later date. I suspect, however, that Stouts Hill had Had Enough: the idea of me

93 hanging around for another year did not please Cromie at all and it was agreed that I should leave as soon as possible, retaking the scholarship examination internally once installed in Uppingham. I bade goodbye to Stouts Hill then, aged twelve, without ever having been made a prefect, selected for a single athletic team, or achieving any distinction whatsoever save a record number of canings and a handful of academic prizes. What am I saying? I won Third Prize (a grand certificate and a two pound book token) in the Independent Association of Preparatory Schools’ National Art Competition for my portrait entitled An Unforgettable Character. I had misread a pot in the art room which I had thought announced itself to be ‘Vanishing Fluid’ and, in attempting to correct a defect around the eyes of my Unforgettable Character, varnished his features so thoroughly that the work more than lived up to its title. Indeed it is probable that the judges even to this day are unable to forget the lustrous, glittering eyes and glossily menacing brows, beard and spectacles of my subject and that he gleams still in their nightmares like a lacquered Rolf Harris. Now I come to think of it, there was such a thing as a ‘sub-prefect’ at Stouts Hill whose duties were unclear and privileges non-existent. It sounds splendidly Casablanca — ‘An exit visa may be obtained from the office of the sub-prefect for the usual fee’ — but the position I believe came into being merely to offer an opportunity for hopeless cases like myself to put something down on their entrance forms for later life. I think I was also entitled to claim myself to have been 3rd XI Scorer, a role I filled once or twice, but only for Home Matches — Stouts Hill wasn’t going to let me loose on other schools for a minute. Not quite expelled then, I lived out the summer holidays, turned thirteen halfway through them, and arrived at Uppingham in the September of 1970. Roger had already had a year at Uppingham and was bracing himself with his usual good humour for the arrival, yet again, of his troublesome younger bro. In those summer holidays he and I were inseparable, at school we did not expect to be. We had arguments, of course, as brothers will (I remember throwing a dart at him on one occasion: the image-memory of it sticking out of his knee sickens me still) but it is extraordinary, looking back, how creatively we managed to fill the holidays in a place so far distant from urban excitements. We were in the same predicament as the Reverend Sydney Smith who, finding himself stuck in the country, wrote to a friend that he could best describe his situation as being ‘simply miles from the nearest lemon’. Sydney Smith, in case you don’t know him, is well worth discovering, he had a unique brand of at once sophisticated, surreal and good-natured wit: he said, for example, of meeting Daniel Webster that he struck him as ‘much like a steam engine in trousers’ and was overheard telling a woman at a dinner party ‘Madam, I have been looking for a person who disliked gravy all my life; let us swear eternal friendship’. Well, Roger and I were not only simply miles from the nearest lemon, we were simply miles too from the nearest café, the nearest cinema, the nearest toyshop, the nearest bowling-alley and the nearest friend. So we had each other. By this time too, we had our sister Jo, who was six that summer of 1970 and who adored and trusted me implicitly. I told her gravely that I knew how to fly and that when she was seven I would teach her the trick of it. Shortly after her seventh birthday, returned from my first term at Uppingham, she reminded me of this promise. I took her upstairs, sat her high on a window-ledge and told her that all she had to do was jump and that my magic would do the rest. After a little thought, she decided not to take me up on

94 the offer. I am glad to say that she never gave the slightest outward show of disappointment or disillusionment in her brother. To thirteen- and fifteen-year-old boys however, six-year-old girls are not very much more than toys and Jo spent most of her time in the company of the great Nanny Riseborough who had served in our house, for the previous owners, since she was a small girl. Lest the reader run away with too Bridesheady a picture of my childhood, I had better describe life in Norfolk just a little. The house where I grew up, and where my parents live to this day is big certainly, but then it had to be big for my father had needed somewhere with space ever since he had settled against an academic career, discovered that life in mainstream industry did not suit him and decided to set up on his own. While we had lived in Chesham we had spent many days meandering around England looking for suitable properties with plenty of outhousery. I recall endless drives to huge, unsaleable houses with overgrown gardens. My mother would gulp at the kitchens and public rooms, my father frown and shake his head at the inadequacy of the outhouses. Roger and I would romp about in the unweeded kitchen gardens, bored to distraction. One of my grandfather’s employees, a sugar worker, happened one day upon a house for sale in the tiny Norfolk village of Booton. It was an imposing Victorian mansion, with an enormous stable-block and an absurd quantity of other outhouses, as well as an attached cottage the size of a substantial townhouse. It boasted, inexplicably, five outside lavatories as well as a splendid kitchen garden that offered asparagus beds, an apple orchard, a tennis court, a badminton lawn, a pigsty, a paddock, hen-coops, sinister rhubarb patches and a summer house. It was the size and condition of the stable-block that clinched the deal. This could be Father’s laboratory. There was room for as many lathes, oscilloscopes and things that go beep, tweet, whoop and boing as the maddest boffin could hope for. In those days it was well serviced too. Mrs Riseborough cooked and nannied Jo. She had sisters-in-law and friends from the village of Cawston who scrubbed and cleaned and lit the fires in winter. The Tubby brothers gardened, but they eventually left to be replaced by Mr Godfrey who ran the garden for many years and who delighted my brother and me by talking to himself a great deal in an endless stream of complaint about how the soil was ‘a bitch’ whenever it was cold. Given that he was an old man who consumed a large quantity of roll-ups every day, no doubt the frosty earth was indeed a bitch and I hate the picture of us giggling at him. It was quite a garden to run, fully Victorian and designed to provide a large household with fruit and vegetables the year round. The outhouses could store apples, pears and potatoes throughout the winter and Mrs Riseborough made jams, pickles and jellies from the plums, cherries, strawberries, raspberries, damsons, gooseberries, blackberries, redcurrants and blackcurrants that the garden bore. Always providing my mother didn’t get to them first, that is. My mother has an absolute passion for sour fruit and can strip a gooseberry bush quicker than a priest can strip a choirboy. I am not so very old you know, but this does seem another life: a life that moved with the rhythm of the seasons, a life that had essentially remained unaltered for decades. Everything was delivered: fish came on Wednesdays (not being Catholics we had no interest in reserving it for Fridays), delivered by horse and cart. It is ridiculous but true, I am really not that old, but to the house the fishman came, every week, his horse clopping along like Steptoe’s Hercules. Bread was delivered too, three times a week I think. On

95 Wednesday mornings my mother would call up Riches of Reepham and order the groceries which were delivered in a van by Mr Neale, who greeted me, as all Norfolk people greet young boys, with a ‘Hello there, young man!’ and a squeeze to the cheeks. Milk came from a local dairy in waxed cartons which, after use, made good fire kindling that hissed, spat and crackled. The yellowest sweatingest butter we had too, neatly patterned on all sides with the marks left by the patting paddles. Meat came by van from Tuddenhams’s of Cawston, it being understood somehow in the community that the Cawston butcher was superior to the Reepham. The coal merchant came every month or so and a mobile library stopped by the house once a week. Fruit and vegetables (oranges, lemons and bananas excepted) came from the garden. ‘Never eat asparagus after Ascot,’ was one of my mother’s rules. An asparagus bed needs to go to seed in late June, so this seems a sensible idea. Somewhat inconsistently however, my mother was forever raiding the beds for their exquisite ferns which look very well in flower arrangements. I remember that asparagus also needed huge quantities of salt in the autumn. Mr Godfrey (helped by me sometimes) would empty sack after sack of ICI salt on each raised bed until they twinkled and glittered as if struck by an early rime frost. The kitchen garden itself had been divided up by its Victorian makers using row upon row of little gravel pathways, lined with box hedging, ‘a bitch to keep tidy’ as poor Mr Godfrey liked to remind me, my brother or any rabbits or jackdaws that might be listening. Mr Godfrey lodged with a certain Mrs Blake and from time to time he would ask permission to take excess vegetables from our garden for their supper table. One day he startled Cawston by making an honest woman of her, but even after their marriage he continued to refer to her as Mrs Blake. Norfolk people are slow to change. I remember an old couple who used to live in a small cottage with an outside lavatory. They moved, many years ago, to a smart new council house in which all modern conveniences were installed. Even today however, if you visit them and one of them wants to go to the loo they will startle onlookers by saying, as they climb the stairs, ‘I’m just going down the garden....’ At the back of our garden was a red wooden pigsty, sadly unused in our day, and behind that a paddock where for a time we kept a huge flock of geese, which were insupportably bad-tempered, loud and greedy, eating everything but stinging nettles, which gave the paddock a rather scrappy and tattered look. Mrs Riseborough cooked lunch every day and cooked in a way that few people are capable of now. I don’t suppose she had ever seen or looked at a cookery book, a food- mixer or a freezer cabinet in her life. She made egg custards, apple pies, rhubarb crumbles, steak and kidney puddings, marrow stuffed with mincemeat, cauliflower and macaroni cheeses and all manner of good English pies, tarts and flans. Roger liked treacle tart with cornflakes on top, I liked them without, so each Thursday we would alternate. Mrs Riseborough taught me how to make a rose for the centre of a pie by taking a layer of pastry and laying it on my thumb and then adding another layer at forty-five degrees to the first and so on, and then cutting them over the thumb gently with a knife. In August or September she made her mincemeat and the Christmas puddings, five or six of them in huge bowls. The pudding mixture included carrots and Mackeson Cream Stout. The mincemeat would then be steeped in brandy and stored for the mince-pies which were

96 made later. Mrs Riseborough’s idea of a salad would be laughed at now, with its English kitchen garden produce of beetroot, radishes, Tom Thumb and butterheart lettuce, tomatoes and cucumber, topped with hardboiled egg and a sprig of parsley, not a rocket, radiccio, frisée lettuce or coriander leaf in sight: I could never get enough of it, so long as there was enough Heinz Salad to go around. She did have some strange ideas, however. She was firmly convinced that the addition of a lump of coal to a bowlful of lettuce in water would keep the lettuce crisp, and from time to time she believed that she had too much blood and needed a nosebleed. Again, who knows? I understand leeches have made a comeback in some hospitals, maybe cupping will return too. She worked in the kitchen, which had no sink and one very low tap, hardly a foot from floor level. We were not on the water mains in Booton, each day the procedure of ‘pumping up’ had to be gone through. There were two wells, one with hard drinking water from the water table, the other a rainwater collection cistern providing water for washing and bathing. The low tap in the kitchen was the only drinking water tap in the house. Guests, especially Londoners, always commented on the beautiful softness of the water when they bathed — it lathered beautifully and never left the scumline that lime- loaded London water does — but most of them wondered how we could go through the nonsense of daily pumping every day and why, in winter it was always colder inside the house than outside. The pump house had been fitted with an electrically driven motor, I wouldn’t want you to picture Roger and me labouring away like medieval parishioners on the village green. The motor drove enormous wheels which were connected by great belts that slapped away as the pump worked. When we had first arrived at Booton a health inspector had taken a sample of water for analysis (the bottom of the holding tank had been alive with bright red nematodes). Some months later a report came back saying that the-water could be consumed, but not by infants under a year old. Since Jo had been drinking nothing else for months, it was decided to ignore such nonsense. As the house had been untouched since it was built, its offices and amenities were (and still are) Victorian, a series of larders, game larders, sculleries, outer sculleries and something called a china pantry surrounded the kitchen. The lavatories were gigantic wooden affairs with chains that said ‘pull’ on them and wash-basins that you tipped on a swivel to empty. The ironing was done by a gigantic electric linen press, all levers topped with bakelite knobs. A great box made by Mann Egerton’s of Norwich, before they decided there was more money in selling Rolls Royce’s I suppose, high on a wall in the back passage shook a tin star to indicate in which room a bell had been rung, and next to it hung the thickened blue and red sally of a bell-rope, to be pulled to summon us children from the garden for lunch or tea, or for a ticking off. In the afternoons, after the silent lunch (Father frowning at my inability to hold a fork properly or at the inanity of some Guinness Record I had solemnly announced), Nanny Riseborough would take Jo for a walk, first in her pram, then by pushchair, until finally they went on foot together. Sometimes Jemina the Siamese cat and I would accompany; according to season we would return with punnet upon punnet of blackberries or trug upon trug of daffodils, to which it transpired, after one afternoon’s heavy picking, I was allergic. I had to be rushed to the nearby town of Aylsham (nearby being seven miles

97 away) to receive an adrenalin shot from the doctor. Only champagne and a beer brewed by Trappist monks in Belgium have ever given me worse attacks. The stable-block, where my father worked, was called Over The Way. ‘Is Daddy over the way?’ became the most urgent question of the day. If he was, then it meant we could muck about inside, slide down banisters, play games, relax and even, if we were daring, watch television. If Daddy was not over the way, it meant he was in his study, in which case we trod gingerly about the house as though on eggshells. The most terrible thing was to believe he was over the way and then discover that you had not heard him returning. In the middle of some game we would hear the tell-tale sound of his pipe being banged down into an ashtray to dislodge the plug and dottle and realise that, horror of horrors, Daddy was In. Instantly, fun, freedom and relaxation turned into terrified silence. The best answer was to steal from the house and find something to do in the garden. Sometimes there were magical days when he had to leave Booton entirely and drive to Norwich or even as far away as Yorkshire. If it was a weekday, this meant we could visit the Men over the way, the men who worked for Father in the stable-block. They would look up from their soldering irons, wink and give a cheerful, ‘Hello there, young man’ when we came in and we would twiddle with the knobs on the oscilloscopes and press the inviting green buttons on the machines. At various times my father manufactured a whole range of different items. He had invented an object called an Arc Rule which was actually demonstrated to my enormous excitement on Tom-Tom, the BBC’s predecessor to Tomorrow’s World. At one stage most of the stable-block was given over to the manufacture of electric Sellotape dispensers, cheerfully assembled by women from the surrounding villages who listened to Radio 2 when the Boss wasn’t about. On another occasion Father helped the Ford motor company with electronic governing systems for their automatic transmissions and the place was littered with bits of Capri. There were objects made throughout the 19705 called ‘thyristor controls’ and I have no idea what they did, but they were cleverly sealed in Araldite so that no one who bought them could find out how they worked without smashing them to pieces. Later, Father designed and built the most entertaining contraption the world has ever seen, a machine for chugging out Tack-Strip, something the furniture industry liked to have about the place. The machinery resembled the mongrel love-child of a cinema projector, a steam-hammer and a Toblerone production line, all put together on a day when Heath Robinson had thought it might be fun to try hallucinogenic mushrooms for breakfast. I could watch Tacky going for hours and hours; I would follow, in a trance, the thousands and thousands of little metallic blue tacks as they shuffled around in a great vibrating bowl and then scuttled like soldier ants down a chute that blasted them with an air-compressed hammer at a rate of six or seven a second into a moving strip of thick cardboard that then folded itself over and continued its journey towards the packing box. The boxes were stacked on to pallets and a small electric fork-lift truck hummed about tidying up. The fights between my brother and me, when Father was away, to be the one to drive the forklift truck were harrowing to behold. My father was inevitably thought of in terms of awe by some local people who referred to him as the Mad Inventor. When strange noises came from the stable-block at three in the morning, I half expected to see a stolid posse of villagers surround the house,

98 flaming torches in hand, demanding to know with what strange forces he be meddling. Years would pass without the villagers ever seeing him, which only added to his mystique. If my mother was not around to order the last detail of his life, as a result of a bout of flu for example, my father might be forced to drive two miles into the village of Reepham to stock up on tins of pipe tobacco. The sight of him helplessly proffering a palmful of coins to the tobacconist like a frightened foreigner was most extraordinary. I don’t suppose to this day he could describe a twenty-pence piece or tell you which British heroes were on the back of which currency notes. I mustn’t exaggerate: he managed to attend British Legion and Conservative Party meetings (in the 1960s and 1970s before the Conservative Party went mad), sail every now and then across the North Sea to Holland with a nautical friend and more recently he served as an exceptionally committed and hard-working governor of Reepham High School. He was never entirely Professor Caractacus Potts, but then he was never the beaming fellow from the Daddy’s Sauce label either. The most pleasing objects by far to emerge from his stable-block laboratories were a line of objects known as Things. Thing was a vast steel cabinet covered with more knobs and switches than you can imagine. It took weeks and weeks for Father and the men to make a single Thing, which was usually destined for a subsidiary of ICI in Mexico, Israel or Turkey where it sat there, Thing-like and Controlled. What it controlled and how it controlled, I have no idea, but Project Thing had taken Father months in the study with slide rules and paper to dream up and then even more months in the drawing office, designing the scores of circuit boards which slotted into Thing like honeycomb frames into a hive. While Thing was being made it was all guts: wrapped in miles and miles of cabling and bulging with power supply objects tightly coiled in copper wire that looked like solenoids, Thing had a very vulnerable and naked look to it. When all the wiring was done and the circuit boards had been soldered and inserted down to the last one, Thing’s metal cowling was stove-enamelled a wonderful 1930s green and the switches, dials and knobs were added. The last thing to go on was the plate which had Alan Fry Controls Ltd., Booton, Norfolk, England printed upon it and the company logo, which took the form of the letters f-r-y, designed by my father to resemble the trace of some pulse of power as shown up on an oscilloscope. Meanwhile my mother would have been typing and telephoning away to arrange all the bills-of-lading, export documents and God knows what other administrative and bureaucratic nightmares that the despatch of a Thing entailed. Sheets and sheets of documentation seemed to be entailed and the sweetest-tempered woman in the world would become, for a week or so, a tiny bit of an old snapdragon. Only the packing of the trunk for school occasioned more drama and crossness from a woman otherwise more cheerful than Pickwick, Pollyanna and Mrs Tiggywinkle on a sunny day in Happyville. Finally, Thing, which was far too heavy to carry and which had been assembled in the largest room in the stable-block, which was upstairs, had to be lowered down into the stable yard through a. giant trap-door by a system of chains and pulleys, what I suppose is called block and tackle, a principle I have never understood. The family would gather in pride as Thing descended, green, gleaming, perfect and entirely like something out of Doctor Who. We all wanted to pay our respects and to enjoy the atmosphere of a Clydeside ship launch, but most of all I wanted to watch the most amusing part of the

99 whole operation, the part that preceded the loading on to the lorry and the final farewell. Thing, being nearly always destined for hot countries, had to be protected against the changes in temperature that it would inevitably undergo in transit. In other words, to inhibit condensation, Thing was wrapped in a huge sheet of transparent plastic, which was then heat-sealed until only a tiny hole remained. My father would then solemnly insert into this tiny hole the nozzle of a vacuum cleaner and proceed to suck out all the air. The sight of the plastic sheet sucking in its cheeks as it were and snugly pressing itself against Thing’s every declivity and protuberance was greatly impressive, comic and delicious, exactly the reverse of the pleasure you get from watching the stirring, twitching and swelling as a hot-air balloon or an airship is inflated. That naturally abhorrent phenomenon, the perfect vacuum, could naturally never be achieved by this method, but when the Hoover nozzle was removed and the tiny hole instantly sealed up, Thing looked like the most impressive object in the world and my pride in my father knew no bounds. He was and is a simply remarkable man. Many sons are proud of their fathers, and no doubt have reason to be — for there are many remarkable men in the world. For sheer brain-power, will, capability and analytical power however, I have to say, all family loyalty aside, that I have never met anyone who came close to him. I have met men and women who had known more and achieved more, but none with so adaptive and completely powerful a brain. His ability to solve problems — mechanical, mathematical, engineering problems — is boundless, which is to say bounded only by the limits of the universal laws he holds so dear, the laws of Newton and the laws of thermodynamics. The clarity of his mind, the perfectionism and elegance of his abstract mathematical and intellectual modelling and practical design and his capacity for sustained concentration, thought and work stagger me, simply stagger me. To grow up under the brooding, saturnine shadow (for in his thirties and forties he brooded greatly) of a man so fiercely endowed with mind power was immensely difficult for all of us. He worked every day, Christmas Day and bank holidays included, for years and years and years. No holidays, no breaks for television, nothing but work. Just occasionally one might hear the sounds of Beethoven, Brahms, Bach or occasionally Scarlatti or Chopin coming from the Broadwood grand piano he had taken apart and rebuilt in the drawing room, but that did not mean relaxation. Music too was something for analysis, deeply emotional analysis often, but analysis founded on a deep knowledge of theory and form. A schoolfriend on first catching sight of him exclaimed, ‘My God — it’s Sherlock Holmes!’ My heart sank on hearing this, for Sherlock Holmes had long been a passion. I was a member of the Sherlock Holmes Society of London (a membership that was directly to connect with my expulsion from Uppingham) and knew most of the stories almost by heart. I had never realised, or admitted to myself before, that whenever I thought of Holmes, or heard his voice, it was really my father whose voice and image came into my head. The descriptions Watson gives of that infuriatingly, cold, precise ratiocinating engine of a brain fuelled by a wholly egocentric passion and fire exactly tallied with my view of my father. Like Holmes, my father would never think of food, creature comforts or society when the working fit was upon him. Like Holmes he had a great musical gift; like Holmes he could be abominably rude to those close to him and charm itself to total strangers; like Holmes he delighted in piquancy and problem-solving for their own sakes,

100 never for gain or fame; like Holmes he combined dreamy abstraction with ruthless logic and an infinite capacity for taking pains; like Holmes he was exceptionally tall, strong and gaunt. Damn it, my father even smoked pipes — for years he virtually lived inside a cloud of thick smoke. Unlike Holmes my father never went out; unlike Holmes my father never solved life problems for others; unlike Holmes my father never achieved household fame and the respect of Popes, Princes and Prime Ministers. Unlike Holmes my father was real. He was my father. I have rarely met a man so pig-headedly uninterested in the world of affairs. I was ever a greedy soul and have always loved the creature comforts and symbols of success. It frustrated me to see someone who could have made a massive fortune many times over, whether by designing top-end hi-fl, computer software, commercial gadgetry or industrial plant, stubbornly refuse to sell himself. I admire such a reluctance of course, and am proud of it: huckstering, boastfulness and noisy advertisement are not appealing, but there is an egotism in excess modesty too, and I thought I detected a misanthropy and arrogance in him that drove me to distraction, partly, of course, because it contrasted with my own worship of success, fame, money and status. I used my mother as an excuse for resenting my father. I felt she deserved better than to have her life revolve entirely around the demands and dictates of a wilfully unworldly husband. I thought she deserved holidays in the sun, warmth in the winter, the right to accept a few more invitations and the chance to go on shopping trips to London. I have no doubt I was jealous too, jealous of the adoration she had for him and the energy she put into making his life as easy as possible. I cannot remember my parents arguing ever. I only recall one occasion when I heard my parents voices raised against each other and it terrified the life out of me. It was night and I had been in bed for about an hour, when, through three floors of the house, there came to my ears the sound of my father shouting and my mother wailing. I padded fearfully into my brother’s room and shook him awake. ‘Listen!’ I hissed. We stared at each other in fear and astonishment. This was entirely unprecedented. Simply unheard of. Our parents never argued, never shouted at each other. At us, yes. Occasionally. But never at each other. Never, never, never. We crept down the back stairs, my brother and I, and listened quakingly for perhaps ten minutes to the sounds that were emerging from my father’s study. He was raging, simply raging while my mother howled and screeched unbearably. There was nothing we could do but tremble and wonder. We edged back up the stairs and talked to each other for a while about what it might mean and then went to our separate rooms to try and sleep. The next morning I came fearfully into the kitchen, half-expecting to see my mother hunched over the table in tears. ‘Morning, darling!’ she said cheerfully, grinning as usual like a tree-frog who is having its toes tickled. I waited until Mrs Riseborough was out of the room before tentatively asking whether everything was all right. ‘All right? What do you mean?’ ‘Well, last night. Roger and I ... we couldn’t help overhearing.’

101 ‘Overhearing?’ She looked genuinely puzzled. ‘You were crying and Daddy was shouting...’ ‘Crying ... ?‘A look of complete bewilderment crossed her face and then suddenly she brightened and began to giggle. ‘Crying? I was laughing!’ ‘What do you mean?’ ‘Well, it was the funniest thing...’ It turned out that the previous night in the study my father had started to hunt about on his desk for a file that he needed. ‘Bloody hell, you put something down for a second and it completely disappears... I mean what is going on?’ My mother could see from her position on the sofa that he was actually sitting on this file, and for ten minutes my father continued to sit on it, all unaware, throwing papers around, pulling open drawers and getting more and more Basil Fawlty in his ungovernable fury at the thing’s disappearance while my mother became more and more overcome by greater and greater transports of laughter. That was what we had heard. Not the greatest story in the world I know, but its point lies in the extreme oddity (as I now know it to be) of a married couple who never shouted at each other or had any kind of row — at least never within the hearing of their children. They adore one another, worship and value one another entirely. I’m sure they have been frustrated by each other sometimes, it would only be natural, and I know it upset my mother that for years my relationship with my father was a mess. She would have to bear my sulking adolescent grunts of ‘I hate Father. I hate him,’ just as she would have to hear him telling me how arrogant, shiftless and incapable of thought or application I was. When I first heard other children’s parents shouting at each other I wanted to die with embarrassment. I just did not believe such things could be, or that if they were, that they could be tolerated. I still find any sort of confrontation, shouting or facing off unbearable. It is possible that the closeness, interdependence and unconditional love each bears for the other may have contributed to whatever fear it was that kept me from partnering anyone for so many years. It always seemed impossible to me that I would ever find anyone with whom I could have a relationship that would live up to that of my parents. They fell in love at first sight and knew instantly when they met that they would marry. They had both been students at London University, my mother a history scholar at Westfield College, my father reading physics and running the music society at Imperial. My father was pleased with my mother’s jewishness, her father adored this brilliant young man and was, I think, especially delighted that my father could speak German, which he had learned in order to read papers on physics, so many of which were published in that language. My grandfather himself was ridiculously multilingual, speaking Hungarian, German, Yiddish, Czech, Slovak, Rumanian and English. I have a picture of him as a young man, splendid in his Austro-Hungarian cavalry officer’s uniform, taken just before he went off to face the Serbian guns at the very start of the First World War. He came to England in the 1930s to teach British farmers how to grow sugarbeet, so my mother, the youngest of three girls, was born in London and grew up in Bury St Edmunds and Salisbury, attending Malvern Girl’s College from a very young age, to all intents and purposes a very English little girl — for the Nazis were about to arrive in Britain at any moment, and my grandfather knew something of what Nazis did to Jews. His name was

102 Neumann, which he changed in England to Newman. His father, my great-grandfather, a Hungarian Jew also of course, had lived for a time in Vienna, and it was always said of him that he was the kind of man to give you the coat off his back. You can imagine how my blood ran cold when I read this in Alan Bullock’s Hitler: A Study in Tyranny, while reading about the early life of Hitler for my last novel, Making History: After their quarrel Hanisch lost sight of Hitler, but he gives a description of Hitler as he knew him in 1910 at the age of twenty-one. He wore an ancient black overcoat, which had been given him by an old-clothes dealer in the hostel, a Hungarian Jew named Neumann, and which reached down to his knees ... Neumann... who had befriended him, was offended by the violence of his anti-Semitism. I suppose there were many Hungarian Jews in Vienna in 1910, and I suppose many of them were called Neumann, but one can’t help wondering if it really might be true that one’s great-grandfather might have befriended and kept warm a man who would later decimate a large part of his family and some six millions of his people. My parents wed secretly: my mother’s scholarship would, for some odd reason, have been forfeit had it been known that she was married while still an undergraduate. Now, after forty-two years together, it still warms my heart when I hear them in another room, this remarkable couple, chattering away as if they’ve just met. The house has hardly changed at all. The pumping up process for water is now simpler than it was, but the kitchen still has only one low tap — all the washing up goes out to a scullery. The Aga has to be riddled every night to shake the ash down and there is still no central heating. People who visit it show wonder at its time-capsule dignity and might even express envy at my good fortune in growing up in such a place. I used to think I hated living there, but throughout all my years of rebellion, ostracism and madness I always carried a photograph of the house with me: I have it still, tattered and torn, but the only copy left in the world of an aerial picture taken, I think, around the very time of my life between prep and public school. Maybe I had just started my first term at Uppingham, maybe it was taken just before I left Stouts Hill for the last time, for my brother and I are nowhere to be seen in the picture, unless we were cantering about on the badminton lawn which is hidden from view. I wouldn’t have kept this picture all those years if the house didn’t mean something to me, and I wouldn’t be gulping down tears now, looking at it, if the memories it invoked were impotent and sterile and incapable of touching me deeply. It was the house where I grew up. It contains my brother’s bedroom, with its peeling William Morris wallpaper; it contains the bedroom I spent most of my life in, lying awake for hours and hours and hours with the self-induced insomnia of adolescence, peeing out of the window into the night air and killing the honeysuckle below because I was too lazy, slobby and sluttish to go downstairs to the lavatory; it contains the bedroom of my sister, with posters of the cricketer Derek Randall still hanging on the wall. It contains the study on whose carpet I stood so many times, facing my father over some new school report, some new disaster, some new affront to authority, some new outrage that might send my mother from the room clutching a handkerchief to her mouth in grief and upset. It contains the same objects and the same memories, and it contains the same two parents who made me from their flesh and whom I adore so much. It is home.





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




103 In the book of Uppingham school rules the first rule is this:— A boy’s study is his castle The only other fortress of privacy afforded a boy at Uppingham came in the shape of the tish, a dormitory cubicle that housed his bed, a small table and such private items as might be fitted into the table or under the bed and vice versa. A curtain could be pulled across and then a tish, too, became a boy’s castle. One assumes that the word tish descends, not from the German for table, but from a contraction of the word ‘partition’, but applying logic to English slang is never a sound idea. I think we can be fairly sure however, that ‘ekker’ the word used at Uppingham for games, derived from ‘exercise’. ‘Wagger’, or ‘wagger-paggerbagger’, which was used to denote ‘waste-paper basket’, is an example of that strange argot prevalent in the 1920s and 1930S that caused the Prince of Wales to be known as the Pragger-Wagger. Even today, in the giddy world of High Anglicanism in such temples of bells, smells and cotters as St Mary’s, Bourne Street, 5W3, I have heard with my own two ears Holy Communion referred to by pert, campy priests as ‘haggers- commaggers’ and my mother still describes the agony and torture of anything from toothache to an annoying traffic jam as ‘aggers and torters’. The only other jargon to offload at this stage is the name for the prefects, who at Uppingham, as at some other public schools, were called ‘praepostors’, which happily preposterous name is, according to the Oxford English Dictionary, a ‘Syncopated form of præpositor’. The OED then cites the following as an example of the word’s usage: 1887 Athenœum 29 Oct. 569/3 He [Rev. E. Thring] strongly encouraged self- government among the boys, and threw great responsibilities upon the præpostors. It is good to know that Thring of the enormous side-whiskers, or Dundreary Weepers (buggers’ grips my mother calls them) was a master of the modern art of delegation. Eighty-three years after that Athenzum article, a great deal of responsibility was still being thrown upon the præpostors, who were known universally as pollies. There were the House Pollies, who had authority only within their Houses, and the School Pollies, who had authority everywhere. A School Polly could carry an umbrella and wear a boater. With that embarrassingly faux anger that middle-class rebels have made a speciality, pollies were called, out of their hearing, ‘pigs’, as in: ‘He’s only a House pig, he can’t tell you what to do,’ or ‘Did you hear that Barrington has been made a School Pig? Tchuh!’ This sort of remark was usually made with the kind of muttered Worker’s Revolutionary Party snarl that public-school boys are very good at reproducing, but which ill-suits their minor grievances. But there again, whose grievances are ever minor? I am fully aware that my grievances, such as they are, are minor. The story of a sensitive young weed struggling to grow up in the robust thicket of an English public school is not likely to arouse sympathy in the breasts of every reader. It was a subject done to death in the earlier part of this century in novels, memoirs and autobiographies. I am a cliché and I know it. I was not kidnapped by slave traders, forced to shine shoes at the age of three in Rio or sent up chimneys by a sadistic sweep. I grew up neither in circumstances of abject poverty, nor in surroundings of fantastic wealth. I was not abused, neglected or exploited. Middle class at

104 a middle-class school in middle England, well nourished, well taught and well-cared for, I have nothing of which to complain and my story, such as it is, is as much one of good fortune as of anything else. But it is my story and worth no more and no less than yours or anyone else’s. It is, in my reading at least, a kind of pathetic love story. I would prefer to call it pathétique or even appassionata, but pathetic will do, in all its senses. The first problem to dominate me at Uppingham was that of the fag test. Every new boy had to pass this blend of initiation rite and familiarisation exam in his first fortnight. He was instructed in this by a Fag Teacher, a second year boy, in my case an athletic fellow called Peter Pattrick. The fagging system was in the process of winding down when I arrived. Personal fags, of the kind found in public school fiction, had become more or less extinct. Fags still had to run errands for pollies, but there was none of the toast-making, shoe-shining, study-tidying, bog-seat-warming, head-patting, thigh-stroking, buttock-fondling drudgery, slavery or abuse that I had dreaded. Fagging consisted essentially of communal chores, the most notable roles in which were to be Morning Fag, who had to wake the House (more on this later) and the unpleasantly named Lay Fag who only had to sweep the corridors, and so far as I can remember, had nothing to do with lavatories at all. The Paper Fag was obliged to go into town early in the morning, before breakfast, pick up the House’s order of newspapers and deliver them to the studies. Another job was to go down twice a day and clear the school pigeonholes for senior boys, bringing up their messages to the House, that sort of thing. I can’t remember what this duty was called — Pigeonhole Fag, I suppose, but again it is madness to expect logic, he might well have been called Kitten Fag, Balloon Fag or Ethics Fag for all I know. When I use the word ‘House’, it must be understood that I am referring to the boarding-houses into which the school was divided, miniature versions of an Oxbridge college I suppose, in as much as one lived, ate and slept in the House, and went into the school itself for lessons, much as an Oxbridge undergraduate lives, eats and sleeps in college and goes to university faculty buildings for lectures. There again, the collegiate system is not very easy to explain either, so it seems rather pointless my attempting to explain one mysterious system by reference to another equally baffling. Essentially, Uppingham was six hundred boys strong, and had twelve Houses of fifty boys each, give or take. Each House had a housemaster, who was most directly responsible for one’s discipline, direction and well-being, he was the man ultimately in loco parentis. Each House had a matron too, and a small number of staff. When I began at my House, Fircroft, there was a female kitchen staff, referred to by the boys, I am sorry to say, as skivvies. All I can offer in our defence is that we did not mean the word in any derogatory sense, it was simply the word used, we knew no other. The skivvies waited on the boys: if one wanted more water in one’s jug or more tea in one s cup, one would, talking to one’s neighbour all the while, simply hold up the hand containing the empty jug or mug and wave it about a bit. If service did not come quickly, one would shout ‘Water!’ or ‘Tea here!’ and eventually the jug or cup would be taken away, filled and returned. Now of course, everything is organised along cafeteria lines and involves serving-hatches and, probably, wide ranges of camomile tea, isotonic NRG drinks and vegetarian falafel. What I can’t understand is why there wasn’t bloody revolution in the town of Uppingham in my day. I suppose waiting hand and foot on loud public-school boys is marginally

105 better than being unemployed, but I shouldn’t wonder if some of the ruder, less considerate boys didn’t get a fair amount of spittle in their teacups and bogeys in their baked beans. Fircroft had a garden, a croquet lawn, a copse with a hammock, disused outside lavatories (the ‘House rears’ in local argot, later to prove the unromantic scene of my deflowering) and, being one of the Houses furthest from the school, two fives courts. Fives is a game much like squash, except that the ball is struck with a gloved hand instead of a racket. It comes in two flavours, Eton and Rugby. We played Eton Fives, a better game, all snobbery aside, because it involved a buttress projecting from one side of the court, presumably deriving from the buttresses of Eton College’s great Perpendicular Gothic chapel, against which boys once sacrilegiously bounced balls. Fives was still played enthusiastically by some, but Eton’s rival Harrow had its own old game which was rapidly becoming fashionable, not just in schools, but in the world of sweaty businessmen and newly emerging health clubs. Squash was already more popular than Fives at Uppingham by the time I arrived and the Fives Courts were really just places where bikes were parked and behind which one smoked, masturbated or sipped cider with, or without, companions. My housemaster was a man called Geoffrey Frowde, an old friend of my parents. He had been up at Merton, Oxford, as an undergraduate, but his wife Elizabeth had been at Westfield with my mother. The Frowdes and my parents had camped out in the Mall together that rainy, rainy night before Queen Elizabeth’s Coronation and waved together at Queen Salote of Tonga as she rode by with her famous lunch sitting beside her. These experiences no doubt form a bond and it was on account of Geoffrey Frowde being at Uppingham that Roger and I had been marked down for it from an early age. All this made my subsequent impossibility as a pupil all the more embarrassing of course. To be endlessly frustrated by the uncontrollable wickedness of the son of friends must put a man in a very difficult position. Back to the fag test. This took the form of a written exam and required of its candidates a full knowledge of all the school Houses (in alphabetical order), their housemasters, their House-captains and their locations. One had to know too all the form masters by their names and initials and where in the school their form-rooms lay. Being an ancient establishment that had prospered in Victorian England, Uppingham, like a good English town, like the English language itself indeed, had rambled and swollen and bulged itself out in a higgledy-piggledy manner that demonstrated no logic, plan or rationale. The new boy had to know where each games field was, the layout of the music school and the art school and the carpentry and metalwork shops and all manner of other places. These were the compulsory and predictable elements of the fag test and held no terrors for me. I have always been able to rely on that excellent memory of mine; the unknown factor in the test lay in the right of the House-captain, whose job it was to mark the results, to top off all of this factual quizzing with school slang tests and unpredictable questions about nicknames, customs and traditions. A cobbled pathway that led past the library through to the central colonnade, for example, was known as the Magic Carpet and an alley whose flooring was made of small square raised tiles sometimes went under the name of the Chocolate Block. There were dozens and dozens of similar nicknames for people, places and regions of the school that one naturally absorbed over a period of months and years, but to find them all out in a week and a half was difficult.

106 The price of failure in the fag test was high: a flogging from the House-captain. I had a dread conviction that boys beat much more mercilessly than prep school headmasters. The captain of the House, whose name was Peck, sported splendid sideburns, nothing to Edward Thring’s Dundreary Weepers of course, but impressive none the less and an indicator, to my mind, of huge reserves of strength. There was something horrible too about the very word ‘flogging’ which conjured images of naval punishment at the mast, the victim biting on wads of leather as the lash was laid on. Peter Pattrick my fag teacher set about his task with vigour, for if I failed, he too would be punished. If I passed, and passed well, there was a reward: Pattrick would have to stand me a tea at the buttery. The school had three butteries, sort of cafés-cum-tea- rooms-cum-tuck-shops-cum-ice-cream-parlours. There was the Upper Buttery, the Lower and the Middle. The one I came to love and cherish was, as befits my nature, the Lower Buttery, a cash only, high cholesterol joint run by a couple called Mr and Mrs Lanchberry, or possibly Launchberry. Mrs Lanchberry (we will settle on that, I have only a limited number of ‘u’s at my disposal) had a way of dropping two eggs into a lake of boiling lard that I have yet to see rivalled. To this day, double-eggs on toast with baked beans, a glass of sparkling dandelion and burdock and I’m simply anybody’s. The Upper Buttery was run by a Mrs Alibone and was really more of a shop, selling sweets, coffee, biscuits, bread, cheeses, ices and other consumables on tick. There was some system of order-forms involved and she always knew exactly when one was bust, which I found irritating and in rather poor taste. The Middle Buttery was hidden somewhere in the Middle, one of the largest playing fields in England, on which dozens (literally) of cricket matches could be played simultaneously, as well as games of tennis, hockey, rugger and Christ knows what else besides. For the fag test then, they dangled a carrot and they brandished a stick. Like most small boys at new schools I was far more driven by the stick than I was drawn by the carrot. To tell the truth, the prospect of being bought a huge tea by Peter Pattrick frightened me almost as much as being flogged by Peck. Pattrick — I think I mentioned that he was athletic? Especially good at tennis — decided that the way to teach me was to take me to the House library, find the largest book he could, Liddell and Scott’s Greek Lexicon probably, and hold it over my head while he tested me. A mistake or hesitation from me and —bang! — down would crash the book on to my skull. This was of no help and only served to confuse me. I remembered everything perfectly well almost the first time I was told it, the sight of that huge eau de nil jacketed dictionary looming above me simply mesmerised me into stupidity. At one point, while the book was hovering and I was havering, the door to the library opened and my brother came in. He took in the situation at a glance, I rolled a pleading eye towards him and then he spoke: ‘That’s it, Peter,’ he said. ‘If he gives any trouble, knock some sense into him.’ I hate myself for telling that story, for it gives quite the wrong impression of Roger who is just about the kindest man I know, with less malice in him than you would find in a bushbaby’s favourite aunt. He will squirm with embarrassment and shame at reading this, which is undeserved. Facts must out, however, and I must record that I was a little hurt by his failing to come to my aid or defence. No grudge of course, for I thought it must be my fault and that this was how things were done at big schools. Prep school is, it goes without saying, no kind of preparation at all for public school, any more than school

107 is a preparation for life. The alteration in scale, the sudden descent from seniority to absolute insignificance, these make any social lessons learnt worse than useless. Those whose early days at public school were least happy were those who had won most prizes, rank and power at their preps. Worth noting here the oddity too of my brother calling Pattrick by his Christian name. It was considered rather cool and adult amongst second, third and fourth years to be on first name terms. ‘Hi, Mark,’ ‘Guy! How’s it going?’ When Mark and Guy subsequently leave school and find each other again in their twenties, after university, working in the same merchant bank it becomes cool, of course, to revert back to surnames. ‘Bloody hell! It’s Taylor!’ ‘Hallett, you old bastard!’ All very puzzling and absurd. In the event, whether Liddell and Scott had anything to do with it or not, I scored 97 per cent in the fag test, a House record. I remember the thrill of seeing the word ‘Excellent!’ scrawled next to my result in Peck’s hand. Peck wore the striped trousers and black waistcoat of the sixth-former as well as the boater of the School Polly, but I seem to remember that he also (unless I have gone stark mad) affected a sort of cream-coloured silk stock of the kind huntsmen wear. I thought him little short of a god —even more so when I watched him playing Volpone in the school play and saw that he was a magnificent actor. I think he was the only boy older than me that I ever had a thing for, if you’ll forgive the prissy phrase. I can’t call it a crush exactly, or a ‘pash’ as they were sometimes odiously called, a ‘thing for’ about sums it up. I can still remember the twelve Houses in alphabetical order, I suppose every Old Uppinghamian can — I’ll recite them for you. Brooklands Constables Farleigh Fircroft The Hall Highfield The Lodge Lorne House Meadhurst School House West Bank West Dean I do that to show the pleasingly bourgeois nature of the names of most of the Houses. ‘Meadhurst’, ‘Farleigh’ and my own House, ‘Fircroft’ — they sound as if they belong in Carshalton or Roehampton, peeping through laurel bushes and shaded by monkey-puzzle trees. These Houses were necessarily larger than the average suburban villa however, despite their names, because they had to fit in dormitory and washing facilities for fifty boys, study accommodation, shower rooms, a dining hall and kitchens, as well as boot

108 rooms, storage space and what estate agents once called ‘the usual offices’. There had to be too the housemaster’s area, the ‘private side’ as it was called, where he could live some sort of life with his wife and family. The Frowdes had two children and a golden labrador called Jester. I don’t suppose an active dog could have a better life than in the boarding- house of a school. No matter how pissed off a boy might be with existence, authority or himself, there was always room to share food and affection with a dog. A dog allowed an adolescent, struggling to be manly, cynical and cool, to romp and giggle and tickle and tumble like a child. Each House had its own character, its own nature, its own flavour and atmosphere. Some were known for having more than the average number of the academically able, others provided a disproportionate number of athletes. One House might have a reputation for being messy and ill-disciplined, another for being a hotbed of queering and tarting. Fircroft lay somewhere in the middle. Frowde was not a martinet and did not beat or terrify the boys. The housemaster of West Bank (you don’t need much imagination to guess the nickname of that House) was as fearsome a man as I have ever met and was rumoured to thrash like an engine ... he taught me Latin and his contribution to my school report one term read: Feckless, fickle, flamboyant and evasive. A disappointment. Which about summed me up. I rather admired and liked him, he was at least more or less consistent. Masters who inspired complete, abject terror were rather a relief to me. Had this man, Abbot, been my housemaster however, I think I should have run away by the end of my first week. He once, in the middle of a Latin lesson, fell silent in the middle of some talk about Horace. We all looked up from our slumbers and saw that he was staring at a pigeon that had landed on an open window-sill. For three minutes he stared at the pigeon, saying nothing. We began to look at each other and wonder what was up. At last the pigeon flapped its wings and flew away. Abbott turned to the form. ‘I am not paid,’ he said, ‘to teach pigeons.’ School House was the province of the headmaster, a most extraordinary man called John Royds, one time Indian Army colonel and ADC to Orde Wingate in Burma. He was physically short but had powerful presence and possessed all the techniques for inspiring awe that one looks for in a headmaster, the ability to swish a gown in an especially menacing way, for example, and a telegraphic, donnishly tart and lapidary way with words. His noticeboard in the colonnade fluttered with memos, smartly typed by an IBM golf ball: Re: The wearing of lapel badges I think not. JCR or Re: The birthday of Her Majesty the Queen

109 The occasion falls today. Hurrah etc. Let joy be unconfined. JCR or Re: Litter in the Old School Room We begin to weary of this nuisance. Be aware: our vigilance is ceaseless. JCR That sort of thing. Every morning he would step out of his House, walk with a firm tread and upright gait that concealed the most painful arthritis and snip a red rosebud from a bush in the garden which he would attach to the buttonhole of his charcoal grey suit. At one stage he developed shingles, causing him to wear the blackest and most impenetrable dark glasses at all times and in all situations, including the pulpit which, coupled with the sub fusc of his clothing, gave him the sinister look of Alan Badel in Arabesque or the menacing cool of a Tarantino hitman avant la lettre. The application form to Uppingham required a recent photograph of the candidate to be affixed to it. By the first day of term Royds would have studied these and knew every single new boy in the school by sight. All these things I would get to know later of course. For the time being I had passed my fag test and could find my way around. That was what mattered. Peter Pattrick was pleased as punch, and punched me pleasedly and proudly on the arm to prove it. Being very well off (he was one of those boys I envied, who seemed endlessly to be in receipt of jaw-droppingly large cheques through the post connected with mysterious trust funds and shares, as if life for him were a continually successful game of Monopoly and the Community Chest eternally benign — I have a dim memory of getting myself, years later; hopelessly into debt with him) Pattrick could afford to stand me just about the biggest blow-out the Lower Buttery had ever seen. Unfortunately he ordered for me, amongst the eggs, bacon and sausages, a huge quantity of chips. Unlike almost everyone else I have ever known, I am not drawn by the appeal of chips and my heart sank as I saw that he was going to watch me eat my way through this heaping plateful down to the last greasy atom. It is on occasions like this where years of dorkily studying books on magic come in really useful. From the earliest days of Booton’s visiting mobile library I had fallen hungrily on any magic book I could find on its shelves. My ‘chops’ as magicians call technique, are not of the first order, it takes the kind of practice a concert musician is prepared to put into his music to perform just the standard pass with a pack of cards, but I can misdirect very well. Every now and then, without his knowing it, I would get Pattrick to look in a particular direction, gesturing with my fork towards a boy who had come in and asking his name for example, while with my other hand I would secretly grab a handful of chips and drop them on to a napkin in my lap. Magic, in the form of close up sleight of hand in particular, is an art-form I venerate, but it must be confessed that almost every technique in it was invented primarily for some venal purpose. Almost all of the palms, passes, jogs, steals, glides, culls, crimps, undercuts and fakes that form the repertory basis of playing-card magic, for example, were devised by riverboat gamblers in the nineteenth century in order, to put it baldly, to

110 cheat, swindle and steal. These techniques can be found in the masterwork on the subject, Expert Card Technique, by Jean Hugard and Frederick Braue, published still, I hope, by Faber and Faber. I suppose those who do not like or approve of magic sense firstly that magicians are the kind of disreputable or vengefully nebbish outsiders who relish putting one over on others and secondly that they themselves, as the victims of a trick, are not quite confident enough in themselves to take it laughingly. They are the kind who tug violently at the magician s sleeves halfway though a performance or say, with snorting contempt, that it is, after all, only a bloody trick. I suppose, and it grieves me to say it, that there was a connection between my love of magic and my stealing. I wouldn’t want you to argue backwards from that and say that any amateur of magic, from Orson Welles to David Mamet, is necessarily a potential thief, but in my case I fear it was true. The techniques of magic made me an excellent thief, I could sell a theft, I could patter a theft. Fortunately —in the last resort fortunately — the showman in me, as far as theft was concerned, always worked against the sly in me and I was usually found out, aces of spades raining from my grasped sleeve... Pattrick, anyway, hadn’t the least clue what I was up to. I got though every forkful of my gigantic feast, having transferred the napkinfuls of chips to another table at an opportune moment. I was in. I had passed the test and was now an entity. 3 The first year at Uppingham passed more or less uneventfully for me. I found the work easy. The maths and the science I simply didn’t attempt, which made it easier still. I had decided years ago that I had a ‘maths block’ and it infuriated me that this condition was not as properly recognised as dyslexia, for example, which was just beginning to be acknowledged as a syndrome or accepted condition. In fact I don’t have the numeral equivalent of dyslexia, if there really is such a thing, it was all, I fear, to do with my father. Anything at which he excelled I seemed to go out of my way to be not just bad at, but quite staggeringly and impressively awful at. Not just maths and science therefore, but music too. The combination of my singing hang-ups and my father’s talent made sure that music and I were never going to be public friends. Hemuss at Stouts Hill had written to my parents and begged to be excused the nerve-fraying task of teaching me the piano. At Uppingham I elected, Christ knows why, to learn the cello, which was taught by a rather sexy and stylish woman called Hillary Unna, whom I always think of whenever I see that impeccable screen goddess Patricia Neale. Hillary Unna liked me (I think) and I shall never forget that she said to me in a husky, vampy voice at our first meeting, ‘Well, here’s a lissom one ...‘ At that time, and at that age, such a compliment to a boy so physically unsure made me glow for weeks. ‘Lissom’, what a kind word to give to a gangling youth. I was thin in those days of course, more than thin I was skinny and growing upwards at a frightening speed, but I believed myself to ‘be awkward- and physically uncoordinated, in fact the unpleasant word ‘unco’ was always hooted at me whenever I dropped a ball or tripped over. There’s no point beating about the bush, I had Lord Nelson’s hand—eye co- ordination and the grace of a Meccano giraffe. Privately, the music school was my favourite place. There were double-doored practice rooms where one could sit at the piano and hammer furiously away like

111 Beethoven in his last years of deafness. For hours I used to stamp out the descending chords and rising arpeggios that opened Grieg’s piano concerto fancying myself on the stage of the Wigmore Hall. There was a record library there too, where I locked myself in, screaming and roaring with pleasure as I wildly and doubtless unrhythmically conducted Beethoven’s Egmont and the overtures of Rossim —which to this day I still secretly place above the deeper artistic claims of Bach and Bruckner. I am still unable to smell the peculiar smell of vinyl records, dusty amplifiers and anti-static cleaning cloths without being transported back to that room, with its blackboard of ruled staves and its stacked jumble of music stands and chairs; back to that overwhelming surge of rapturous, tumultuous joy and the inexpressibly passionate deluge of excitement that flooded though me when the music bellowed from that one single Leak speaker. I could spend thousands now on the highest end hi-fl in the world and know that, for all the wattage and purity of signal, the music would never quite touch me again as it did then from that primitive monaural system. But nor could anything quite touch me now as it did then. Amongst the boys of Fircroft there were the cool and the uncool. This was not, after all Edwardian England, not a world of ‘May God forgive you, Blandford-Cresswell, for I’m sure I shan’t,’ or ‘I say, that’s beastly talk, Devenish,’ or ‘Cave, you fellows, here comes old Chiggers.’ This was 1970 and hippiedom and folk rock were making their sluggish, druggy moves. In my first week Rick Carmichael (way cool) stopped me in the corridor and said, ‘You’re Roger Fry’s brother aren’t you?’ I nodded. ‘Well, could you take a message for me?’ I nodded again. ‘See that bloke over there?’ Carmichael pointed down the corridor towards a boy with dangerously long hair, hair that nearly reached his collar, hair at which this boy pulled, stroked and twiddled, thoughtfully, lovingly and dreamily as he leaned against a wall. ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘I see him.’ ‘Well, his name is Guy Caswell and I want you to say this to him. “Captain Beefheart is better than Edgar Broughton.” Got that?’ ‘Sorry?’ I had heard Captain Beefheart as Captain ‘Bee-fart’ and thought this might be some terrible trick to get me into trouble. ‘It’s not difficult. “Captain Beef heart is better than Edgar Broughton.” Okay?’ ‘All right, Carmichael.’ I gulped slightly and moved down the corridor, repeating the strange mantra to myself over and over again under my breath. ‘Captain Beefheart is better than Edgar Broughton, Captain Beefheart is better than Edgar Broughton, Captain Beefheart is better than Edgar Broughton.’ It was utterly meaningless to me. May as well have been Polish. I reached the boy with the long hair and coughed tentatively. ‘Excuse me... ‘Yeah?’ ‘Are you Caswell?’ ‘Yeah.’ ‘Er, Captain Beef heart is better than Edgar Broughton.’

112 ‘What?’ Caswell let his left hand fall from its ministrations to the glossy locks. Oh Christ, surely I hadn’t got it wrong? Maybe he had misheard. ‘Captain Beefheart,’ I said with slow and deliberate emphasis, ‘is better than Edgar Broughton.’ ‘Oh yeah? And what the fuck do you know about it?’ snarled Caswell, straightening himself up and starting towards me. I hared off down the corridor as fast as I could go, past Carmichael, who was doubled up with laughter, and out into the quad, not stopping until I reached the back of the fives courts, panting and terrified. After tea, as I was making my way towards the study I shared with Whitwell, a new boy in my intake, there came a tap on my shoulder. ‘Hey, Fry...’ It was Caswell. ‘No, no. It’s okay,’ he said as he saw the fear leap into my eyes. ‘It was Rick, right? It was Carmichael. He told you to say that.’ I nodded. ‘Okay, here’s the deal. Go to Carmichael’s study and tell him that The Incredible String Band is better than Jethro Tull.’ Oh Lord, what had I got myself into here? ‘The Amazing String Band is...’ ‘Incredible, yeah? The Incredible String Band is better than Jethro Tull.’ ‘Jethro Tull?’ ‘That’s it. Jethro Tull.’ ‘As in the drill?’ My factoid-rich, Guinness Book of Records mind knew that Jethro Tull was the name of the man who had invented the seed-planting drill in 1701, though why this rendered him inferior to an incredible string band, I couldn’t begin to guess. ‘The Drill?’ said Caswell. ‘Never heard of them. Just say what I said, ‘kay?’ There was enough friendliness of manner for me to know that there was no danger for me in this, and the idea of running messages appealed to the frustrated cub scout in me. I liked being thought of as useful. Carmichael had a study to himself in another corridor. I knocked on the door, only slightly nervously. Loud music was playing inside, so I knocked again. A voice rose from within. ‘C’min...’ I opened the door. Every boy decorated his study differently, but most went to some lengths to make them as groovy as their incomes would allow. Fabrics were hung on walls and depended from ceilings, which gave the impression of Bedouin tents or hippy dens. These fabrics were known as tapestries, or tapos. Joss-sticks were sometimes burned, to hide the smell of tobacco or just because they were far-out and right-on. Carmichael’s study was highly impressive, a psychedelic tapo here, a low wattage amber light bulb there. It was nowhere near as impressive as his older brother Andy’s study, however. Andy Carmichael was something of an engineer and had constructed out of wood elaborate levels and ladders within the study, turning it into a cross between an adventure playground and Victor Frankenstein’s laboratory. At the moment, the House was abuzz with the rumour that Andy Carmichael had nearly completed a hovercraft he had been building and that it was going to get its trial run on the Middle very soon. He did finish it eventually, I remember, and it worked too: every bit as noisy, useless and disgusting as the commercial

113 hovercrafts that ply the channel today. I believe there was a yet older Carmichael called Michael, but he had already left the school. I liked the idea of his being told to get into the family car and used to repeat endlessly to myself, ‘Get into the Carmichael car, Michael Carmichael ... get into the Carmichael car, Michael Carmichael.’ What stunned me about Rick Carmichael’s study however, was the sight of the books on his bookshelf. Six Penguin copies of P. G. Wodehouse Jeeves stones. On the frontmost, Jeeves in the Offing, I could see a photograph from a BBC series of thee or four years earlier which had starred Dennis Price as Jeeves and, as Bertie Wooster... Ian Carmichael. Rick looked up and followed the direction of my eyes. ‘Are you ... is he? I mean ...‘ I stammered. ‘You know, on the telly...?’ ‘He’s my uncle,’ said Rick, turning down the volume on his record-player, which had been pushing out a rather appealing song about tigers and India, of which more later. ‘I love P. G. Wodehouse,’ I said solemnly. ‘I adore him.’ ‘Yeah? Do you want to borrow one?’ I had read them all, all the Jeeves stories, ever since Margaret Popplewell, a friend of my mother’s from her schooldays, had given me a copy of Very Good, Jeeves for my birthday. I had been collecting him in all editions for some time and had a massive collection. The great man wrote nearly a hundred books, so there was still a long way to go. ‘Could I?’ He passed Jeeves in the Offing over to me. I am looking at that very copy now, it is on the desk next to my keyboard. On the front we see a photograph of a beautifully dressed Ian Carmichael wearing a monocle (a source of much debate amongst Wodehousians —there is only one actual reference to Bertie wearing an eye-glass, and that was in a painting of him which became a poster, but you really don’t want to know that) a red carnation is in his buttonhole and a wonderfully dim good-natured look of startlement beams though his exceptionally blue eyes. Above the tubby Penguin that stands next to the title is printed ‘3/6’ (which was shortly to become known as seventeen and a half pence) and on the back we read: The cover shows Ian Carmichael as Bertie Wooster in the B.B.C. series ‘The World of Wooster’ (Producer: Michael Mills, by arrangement with Peter Cotes. Photographer Nicholas Acraman) Many years later I worked for Michael Mills, who was a formidably shrewish and frightening man. There was very little he had not done in the world of Light Entertainment and he did not take kindly to unpunctual actors. I was booked for a part, very early on in my ‘career’ on a half-hour comedy called Chance in a Million which starred Simon Callow, whom I was desperate to meet, since his book Being an Actor had been a huge inspiration at university. I had not known that Teddington Lock, where Thames TV studios had their being, took well over an hour to get to from Islington, where I was living at the time, and had arrived at least half an hour late. Michael Mills, who was the kind of man who wore spacious cardigans and half-moon spectacles that dangled on black string, gave me a withering look and told me that he would be writing to my agent

114 about the unprofessional hour at which I had arrived. He has died since I believe and I never got a chance to talk to him about the making of that 1960s ‘World of Wooster’ series. It is strange to touch this book now and know that it was handed to me, lazily and charmingly, by Rick Carmichael more than a quarter of a century ago. Stranger still, I suppose, in the light of the fact that I was to spend four years myself playing Jeeves in another television adaptation of those same stories. ‘Anything else?’ Rick said. ‘Oh!’ I jerked up from my reverent gaze at the book. ‘Oh, yes. The Unbelievable String Band is better than Jethro Tull.’ Carmichael smiled, ‘Er, I think you mean “The Incredible String Band”, don’t you?’ ‘Oh,’ I said. ‘Damn. Yes.’ ‘Right,’ said Carmichael. ‘You tell Guy that Carol King is better than Fairport Convention.' I can’t remember how many times I shuttled between Carmichael and Caswell delivering insulting messages on the subject of their favourite music, but it meant that somehow I became more or less accepted early on by these two and by Rick’s best friend, Martin Swindells, who was known as Mart and sometimes as Dog. They were also friendly with a boy called Roger Eaton, who was red-haired and called Roo. They were cool, this group, Guy, Rick, Mart and Roo. They knew more about rock music than I thought I could ever, ever learn. They were cool and they were amiable. They were not interested in status, ambition, gossip about the staff or schooly, status-bound things. They didn’t take joy in teasing the weak or sucking up to the strong. They liked music and they liked fun. One of them, I won’t say which in case their parents are reading this, showed me the first ever joint I had ever seen. He didn’t let me smoke it, but he showed it to me. For all I know it wasn’t a joint at all, just a cigarette rolled up to look like one. Rock music, of course, was not the same as rock and roll. Nor was it the same as pop. Since the demise of The Beatles, pop and the single-play record had become singularly unhip, at public schools at any rate. Albums were where it was at. Albums meant Pink Floyd, Van de Graaf Generator, King Crimson, Deep Purple, Led Zeppelin, Genesis (nice Charterhouse boys with a cockney drummer) and — at the folksy end — Jethro Tull, Procul Harum, Steeleye Span and, bless them, The Incredible String Band. A lot of that rock would now be called Heavy Metal: Uriah Heep, Iron Maiden and Black Sabbath were, unless I’ve leapt ahead of myself, already going, and cool people already knew about David Bowie whose ‘Major Tom’ had flopped the year before but was a coming man. There was a rumour too that Long John Baldry’s old keyboard player, Elton John, had produced an album that was so far out it was far in. These were things I did not know. There was one band, however, that I soon came to know everything about. About halfway through my first term, Rick Carmichael ran out of cash and decided to hold a Study Sale, an auction in which all the stuff, gear and rig he could do without became available to the highest bidder. I came away from this sale with the complete set of BBC tie-in Jeeves Penguins and an LP, the very album whose first track ‘Hunting Tigers Out in India’ had been playing when I had first knocked on Rick’s door. It was called Tadpoles and was the work of The Bonzo Dog DooDah Band. I had heard of them because they had enjoyed their one and only Number One hit

115 with ‘The Urban Spaceman’ while I was still at Stouts Hill. This album was most strange and wonderful to look upon. It had holes pierced in the eyes of the band members on the front and, inside, a card which you could slide backwards and forwards, which made all kinds of shapes pass in and out of the blank eye sockets. Below the title Tadpoles was the phrase... Tackle the toons you tapped your tootsies to in Thames TV’s Do Not Adjust Your Set ... which, it grieves me to say, meant nothing whatever to me, our house not being an ITV house. I am not even sure if my parents’ television could get ITV at this stage. I remember, to divert for a moment, that when we had moved up to Norfolk, aged nine and seven, Roger and I had been desperate to watch television that first evening because the week before, in Chesham, we had seen the first ever episode of Doctor Who and were already hopelessly hooked. Something had happened in transit to the mahogany Pye television with its tiny grey screen and it wouldn’t work. We missed that second episode and I grieve still at the loss. Do Not Adjust Your Set, I now know was an early evening comedy show which had featured Michael Palm, Terry Jones and Eric Idle, who had by this time already gone on to join John Cleese, Graham Chapman and Terry Gilliam in Monty Python’s Flying Circus, which was just beginning to seep into our consciousnesses. The music for Do Not Adjust Your Set was provided by a very strange collection of art-students and musicians who called themselves The Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band. By the time I began seriously to get into them, they had dropped their Doo-Dah and were just The Bonzo Dog Band. The two leading lights of the band were the immensely skilled musical pasticheur Neil Innes (who continued his association with the Python people by writing the songs for and appearing in The Rutles and The Holy Grail and so on), and the late, majestic and remarkable Vivian Stanshall, one of the most talented, profligate, bizarre, absurd, infuriating, unfathomable and magnificent Englishmen ever to have drawn breath. Stanshall (Sir Viv to his worshippers) died in a fire a few years ago and I felt terrible because I hadn’t been in touch with him for years — ever since I had helped him out a little by investing in a musical he had written called Stinkfoot which played, to generally uncomprehending silence, in the Shaw Theatre, London some ten or so years ago. Over the next year at Uppingham I bought their other albums, Gorilla, A Doughnut In Granny’s Greenhouse, Keynsham and finally Let’s Make Up and Be Friendly, their last, which contained Stanshall’s short story, ‘Rawlinson End’ which I can still recite by heart and which he went on to develop into that outré film masterpiece, Sir Henry At Rawlinson End starring Trevor Howard as Sir Henry and J. G. Devlin as his butler, Old Scrotum, the wrinkled retainer. When I first heard the joke, ‘Scrotum, the wrinkled retainer,’ I laughed so much I honestly thought I might die of suffocation. Oh, very well, it isn’t Alexander Pope or Oscar Wilde, but for me it was as delicious as anything could be delicious. With Stanshall, it was as if a new world had exploded in my head, a world where delight in language for the sake of its own textures, beauties and sounds, and where the absurd, the shocking and the deeply English jostled about in mad jamboree. It was Stanshall’s voice, I think, that delighted me more than anything. It had two registers, one light and dotty, with the timbre almost of a 19205 crooner, and capable of

116 very high pitch indeed, as when he sang songs like the Broadway standard ‘By A Waterfall’; the other was a Dundee cake of a voice, astoundingly deep, rich and fruity, capable of Elvis impersonations (the song ‘Death Cab for Cutie’ for example) as well as great gutsy trombone blasts of larynx-lazy British sottery, to use a Stanshally sort of phase. Most people will know his voice from the instruments he vocally introduces on Mike Oldfield’s otherwise entirely instrumental album Tubular Bells, which sold in its millions and millions in the early 19705 and founded the fortune of Richard Branson. The Bonzos were my bridge between rock music and comedy, but comedy was more important to me by far than rock music. I did eventually buy an Incredible String Band album called, it grieves me to relate, Liquid Acrobat As Regards The Air as well as Meddle, Obscured By Clouds and other early Pink Floyd, but my heart wasn’t really in them. It was comedy for me. Not just the modern comedy of the Bonzos and Monty Python, nor the slightly older comedy of Peter Cook and Dudley Moore, much as I adored those geniuses. I also collected records with titles like The Golden Days of Radio Comedy and Legends of the Halls and learned by heart the routines of comics like Max Miller, Sandy Powell, Sid Field, Billy ‘Almost a Gentleman’ Bennett, Mabel Constandouros, Gert and Daisy, Tommy Handley, Jack Warner and most especially, Robb Wilton. Perhaps we’re getting back to that ‘can’t sing, can’t dance: won’t sing, won’t dance’ subject. If I learned all the comedy, I could repeat it, perform it, which was as close as I could come to singing or dancing. I’m not a bad mimic, no Rory Bremner or Mike Yarwood, but not bad, and I could repeat back the comedy I had learned, word for word, intonation for intonation, pause for pause. Then I might be able to try out some of my own. I was not alone in this. Richard Fawcett, a boy of my term, shared this love of comedy. He was a fine mimic too, and an astoundingly brave and brilliant actor. He and I would listen to comedy records together, pointing out to each other why this was funny, what made that even funnier, trying hard to get to the bottom of it all, penetrating our passion, wanting to hug it all to us in heaping armfuls, as teenagers will. Fawcett had a collection which included routines by Benny Hill and Frankie Howerd, as well as an extraordinary song called ‘The Ballad of Bethnal Green’ by someone whose name I fear I have forgotten, (I think his first name was Paddy, I expect someone will write to me and let me know) and which included delightfully weird lyrics like: Rum-tiddle-tiddle, rum tiddle-tiddle Scum on the water Lint in your navel and sand in your tea And somewhere in this ballad came the splendid phrase, With a rum-tiddly-i-doh-doh I hate my old mum Fawcett also shared with me a passion for words and we would trawl the dictionary together and simply howl and wriggle with delight at the existence of such splendours as ‘strobile’ and ‘magniloquent’, daring and double-daring each other to use them to masters in lessons without giggling. ‘Strobile’ was a tricky one to insert naturally into

117 conversation, since it means a kind of fir-cone, but magniloquent I did manage. I, being I, went always that little bit too far of course. There was one master who had berated me in a lesson for some tautology or other. He, as what human being wouldn’t when confronted with a lippy verbal show-off like me, delighted in seizing on opportunities to put me down. He was not, however, an English teacher, nor was he necessarily the brightest man in the world. ‘So, Fry. “A lemon yellow colour” is precipitated in your test tube is it? I think you will find, Fry, that we all know that lemons are yellow and that yellow is a colour. Try not to use thee words where one will do. Hm?’ I smarted under this, but got my revenge a week or so later. ‘Well, Fry? It’s a simple enough question. What is titration?’ ‘Well, sir.., it’s a process whereby...’ ‘Come on, come on. Either you know or you don’t.’ ‘Sorry sir, I am anxious to avoid pleonasm, but I think...’ ‘Anxious to avoid what?’ ‘Pleonasm, sir.’ ‘And what do you mean by that?’ ‘I’m sorry, sir. I meant that I had no wish to be sesquipedalian.’ ‘What?’ ‘Sesquipedalian, sir.’ ‘What are you talking about?’ I allowed a note of confusion and bewilderment to enter my voice. ‘I didn’t want to be sesquipedalian, sir! You know, pleonastic.’ ‘Look, if you’ve got something to say to me, say it. What is this pleonastic nonsense?’ ‘It means sir, using more words in a sentence than are necessary. I was anxious to avoid being tautologous, repetitive or superfluous.’ ‘Well why on earth didn’t you say so?’ ‘I’m sorry, sir. I’ll remember in future, sir.’ I stood up and turned round to face the whole form, my hand on my heart. ‘I solemnly promise in future to help sir out by using seven words where one will do. I solemnly promise to be as pleonastic, prolix and sesquipedalian as he could possibly wish.’ It is a mark of the man’s fundamental good nature that he didn’t whip out a knife there and then, slit my throat from ear to ear and trample on my body in hobnailed boots. The look he gave me showed that he came damned close to considering the idea. Christ, I could be a cheeky, cocky little runt. I gave the character of Adrian in my novel The Liar some of the lines I liked to use to infuriate schoolmasters. ‘Late, Fry?’ ‘Really, sir? So am I.’ ‘Don’t try to be clever, boy.’ ‘Very good, sir. How stupid would you like me to be? Very stupid or only slightly stupid?’ I regret that I cut such an odious, punchable figure sometimes, but I don’t ever regret those hours spent alone or with Richard Fawcett trawling the dictionary or playing over and over again comedy record after comedy record. Whether we are the sum of influences or the sum of influences added to the sum of

118 genes, I know that the way I express myself, the words I choose, my tone, my style, my language is a compound which would be utterly different, utterly, utterly different if I had never been exposed to any one of Vivian Stanshall, P. G. Wodehouse or Conan Doyle. Later on the cadences, tropes, excellences and defects of other writers and their rhetorical tricks, Dickens, Wilde, Firbank, Waugh and Benson, may have entered in and joined the mix, but those primal three had much to do with the way I spoke and therefore, how I thought. Not how I felt but how I thought, if indeed I ever thought outside of language. I have diverted into this world of The Bonzos and comedy because I am coming soon, all too soon, to my second year at Uppingham, and I don’t want to create the impression of a lone mooncalf Fry, absorbed only in love and the pungent pain of his lonely pubescence. There was a context: there were fifty boys in the House, they had their own lives too and we were all touched by the outside world and its current fads and fantasies. In my first year I had Fawcett as a friend, and later, a boy called Jo Wood, with whom I was to share a study in my second year. Jo Wood was sound, sound as a bell. Solid, cynical, amused and occasionally amusing, he did not appear to be very intelligent, and unlike Richard Fawcett and me, seemed uninterested in words, ideas and the world. But one day he said to me: ‘I’ve got it now. It’s reading isn’t it?’ ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘You read a lot, don’t you? That’s where it all comes from. Reading. Yeah, reading.’ The next time I saw him he had a Herman Hesse novel in his hands. I never saw him again without a book somewhere on his person. When I heard, some years later, that he had got into Cambridge I thought to myself, I know how that happened. He decided one day to read. He taught me a lot about the human will, Jo Wood. But more than that, he was a kind patient friend who had much to put up with in our second year when he had to share a study with a boy whose life had suddenly exploded into a million pieces. The only real fly in the ointment that first year, senseless brushes with authority aside, came in the form of Games. Ekker. Sports. There is a fine Bonzo number called ‘Sport’ which follows a sensitive boy at school (called Stephen pleasingly enough) who prefers to lie in the long grass with his pocket edition of Mallarmé (another Stephen) while the big rough boys are at their football. The chorus calls out gruffly: Sport, sport, masculine sport Equips a young man for society! Yes, sport turns out a jolly good sort It’s an odd boy who doesn’t like sport! I laughed at that song, but I inwardly wept at it too. I hated sport, ekker, games, whatever they wanted to call it. And it was a fuck sight harder to get off ekker at Uppingham than it had been at prep school. ‘A fuck sight’ was the kind of language one used at Uppingham all the time, out of the hearing of staff. It was one of the first things I had noticed about the difference between Stouts Hill and Uppingham, the language, just as for Robert





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




119 Graves in Goodbye To All That it had been the transition from Charterhouse to the Royal Welch Fusiliers that had marked a startling move up in the swearing stakes. From a world of ‘bloody heck’ and the occasional ‘balls’ I had been hurled into a society where it was ‘fuck’, ‘wank’, ‘bollocks’, ‘cunt’ and ‘shit’ every other word. To say that I was shocked would be ridiculous, but I was slightly scared. The swearing was part of the move up towards manliness, part of the healthiness. Study sales, butteries and shops, that kind of independence I could appreciate, but things that were manly frightened me. And nothing was more manly than Games. Games mattered at Uppingham. If you had your First Fifteen colours, you were one hell of a blood. If you represented just your House, let alone the school in some sport, it gave you something, an air, a reason to feel good about yourself, a sense of easy superiority that no amount of mental suffering with irregular verbs could threaten. Work was ultimately poofy and to be bad at work was no cause for shame. Games went on all the time. House ekker was a daily thing, except on Fridays. It was no good cheering when Fridays came around however, for Fridays were compulsory Corps days, when we had to march up and down in Second World War battle-dress as part of the school’s Combined Cadet Force. I was Army, poor bloody infantry; my brother wisely chose the Air Force. I must have looked as much like a military unit as Mike Tyson looks like a daffodil, shuffling about the parade ground in my badly blancoed webbing, clodding corps-boots, an overtight black beret that would never fold down and made me look more like a French onion seller than a soldier, writhing in an itchy khaki shirt, trying to march in step with a clunking Lee Enfield rifle over my shoulder and the school sergeant-major, RSM ‘Nobby’ Clarke yelling in my ear. But you could fuck me with a pineapple and call me your suckpig, beat me with chains and march me up and down in uniform every day and I would thank you with tears in my eyes if it got me off games. Nothing approached the vileness of games, nothing. Grotesque ‘Unders versus Overs’ matches would arise from time to time, in which under sixteens played over sixteens, and school matches that you had to watch and cheer at. PE lessons cropped up in the syllabus, in academic time: absurd Loughborough educated imbeciles calling everyone ‘lads’ and using Christian names as if they found the snobbery of public school inimical to their healthy, matey world of beer, bonhomie, split- times and quadriceps. ‘Good lad, Jamie!’ Oh, there was always a Jamie, a good-lad-Jamie, a neat, nippy, darty, agile scrum- halfy little Jamie. Jamie could swarm up ropes like an Arthur Ransom hero, he could fly up window frames, leap vaulting horses, flip elegant underwater turns at the end of each lap of the pool, somersault backwards and forwards off the trapeze and spring back up with his neat little buttocks twinkling and winking with fitness and firmness and cute little Jamieness. Cunt. Then they had the nerve, these barely literate pithecanthopoids in their triple-A tee- shirts and navy blue tracksuit bottoms, with their pathetically function-rich stop-watches around their thick, thick necks, to write school reports citing ‘motor development percentiles’ and other such bee’s-wank as if their futile, piffling physical jerks were part of some recognised scientific discipline that mattered, that actually mattered in the world. Even a tragic management consultant bristling with statistics and psychological advice on the ‘art of people handling’ —art of the so-fucking-obvious-it-makes-your-nosebleed

120 more like — has some right to look himself in the mirror every morning, but these baboons with their clip-boards and whistles and lactic acid burn statistics, running backwards with a medicine ball under each arm, shouting ‘Come on, Fry, shift yourself, let’s see some burn...’ Yeugh! The squeak of rubber soles on sports hall floors, the rank stench of newly leaking testosterone, the crunch of cinder racing tracks, the ugly, dead thump of a rugger ball taking a second later than the ugly, dead sight of it hitting the hard mud as you sullenly watched the match, the clatter of hockey sticks, the scrape of studded boots on pavilion floors, the puke-sweet smell of linseed oil, ‘Litesome’ jock-straps, shin-guards, disgusting leather caps worn in scrums, boots, shorts, socks, laces, the hiss and steam of the showers. Fu-u-u-u-u-uck! I want to vomit it all out now, the whole healthy spew of it. It ate into my soul like acid and ate its way out again like cancer. I despised it so much ... so much ... so much. A depth and height and weight and scale of all consuming hatred that nearly sent me mad. Games! How dared they use that grand and noble word to describe such low, mud- caked barbarian filth as rugby football and hockey? How dared they think that what they were doing was a game? It wasn’t ludic, it was ludicrous. It wasn’t gamesome, it was gamey, as a rotten partridge is gamey. It was shit, it was a wallowing in shouting, roaring, brutal, tribal shit. And the shittiest shit of it all was the showers. Yes, I might have been tall, yes, I might have been growing almost visibly, yes, my voice might have broken, but what was happening down there? Fuck all, that was what was happening. If I heard the word ‘immature’ used, even in the most innocent context, I would blush scarlet. Immature meant me having no hair down there. Immature meant me having a salted snail for a cock. Immature meant shame, inadequacy, defeat and misery. They could peacock around without towels, they could jump up and down and giggle as bell-end slapped against belly-button, and heavy ball-sack bounced and swung, they could shampoo their shaggy pubes and sing their brainless rugby songs in the hiss of the shower-room, it was all right for them, the muddy, bloody, merciless, apemen cunts. And you want to know the joke, the sick, repulsive joke? I love sport. I love ‘games’. I a-fucking-dore them. All of them. From rugby league to indoor bowls. From darts to baseball. Can’t get enough. Cannot get e-fucking-nough. Now I do, now. Part of the reason for this book being a month and half late in delivery is that the England—Australia test matches and Wimbledon, and the British Lions Rugby Fifteen’s tour of South Africa have all been tumbling out of the screen at once. I had to watch every match. Then there were the golf majors, the Formula One season building to its climax and Goodwood too. And now the soccer season is about to begin, and it’ll be Ford Monday Night Football and more precious hours sat in front of the television lapping up sport, sport, sport, one of the great passions of my life. Those poor buggers in the gym

121 trying to get my hopeless weedy body to do something healthy like climb a rope or spring over a vaulting horse, they did their best. They weren’t stupid, they weren’t mean. They would write witty reports on me: ‘The only exercise he takes is the gentle walk to the sports centre to present his off-games chit,’ that kind of thing. ‘Physical exertion and Stephen Fry are strangers. I have tried to introduce them, but I feel they will never get on.’ Good men, trying to do a good job. Talk about betrayal. How am I ever going to apologise to that miserable, furious, wretched thirteen-year- old, huddled in a scared bony heap on the changing room bench trying to work out how to shuffle to the showers without being seen? All he has is his anger, his fury, his verbal arrogance, his pride. Without. that, he would shrivel into a social nothingness that would match his shrivelled physical nothingness. So forgive him the intemperance of his fury, forgive him his rage, his insolence and the laughing cockiness he is prey to: they are just a ragged towel. A towel to hide his shame, to cover up the laughable no-cockiness he is prey to. Can so much be explained by (literally) so little? Le nez de Cléopâtre: s’il eût plus court, toute la face de la terre aurait changé... didn’t Pascal write that? If Cleopatra’s nose had been shorter the whole face of the world would have been changed. I’ve never quite understood why he said ‘shorter’, not ‘longer’ —maybe in Pascal’s day, or Mark Antony’s for that matter, a short nose was considered uglier than a long one. Maybe I’ve misunderstood the whole thrust of the thought. Anyway, when I first came upon that pensée, (a favourite with French masters in dictation on account of its silent, subjunctive circumflex) I remember thinking about the face of my world. Le nœud d’Éienne: s’il eût plus long... But then, as Pascal also said, the heart has its reasons, which Reason knows nothing about. Your guess is almost certainly better than mine. The spectator sees more of the game. So back to that sad little creature. It’s an average weekday lunchtime halfway through his first term. As the meal has progressed, he has become quieter and quieter because he knows that after lunch he must face the House polly and the Ekker Book. He has to tick everyone off, this officious polly. He will want to see either a note from matron explaining why you are Off Ekker, or he will Put You Down for a game. I wait in the queue, my stomach pumping out hot lead. The polly looks up briefly. ‘Fry. Unders Rugger. House pitch.’ ‘Oh. No. I can’t.’ ‘What?’ ‘I’m fencing.’ ‘Fencing?’ I had heard someone say this the other day and they seemed to have got away with it. The polly flips though his book. ‘You’re not on the list as a fencer.’ Bollocks, there’s a list. I hadn’t thought of that. ‘But Mr Tozer told me to turn up,’ I whine. Mr Tozer, known inevitably as Spermy Tozer, was big in the world of sports like fencing and badminton and archery. Uppingham’s Tony Gubba. ‘I had expressed an interest. ‘Oh. Okay. Fencing, then. Make sure you bring back a chit from him so I can put you

122 in the book.’ Hurray! One afternoon taken care of. One afternoon where, so long as that polly doesn’t see me, I can do what I like, roam where I like. He’ll forget about that chit from Spermy Tozer. But there will be other afternoons, and new excuses needed. Every day is a fresh hell of invention and sometimes, just sometimes, I actually have to turn up and sometimes, I am caught skulking unhealthily, and I am punished. Peck I think, was the last House-captain to have the right to beat boys without the housemaster’s permission. The most common form of punishment not corporal, was something called the Tish Call. Tishes, as I have already explained, were the cubicles that divided up the beds of the dormitory. Everyone, in every House in the school, slept in a tish. A Single tish call was a small slip of paper given by a polly to an offender. On it was written the name of a polly from another House. A Double tish call contained two names of two different pollies, again from two different Houses. I was for ever getting Triple tish calls, three different pollies, thee different Houses. The recipient of a tish call had to get up early, change into games clothes, run to the House of the first polly on the list, enter the polly’s tish, wake him up and get him to sign next to his name on the slip of paper. Then on to the next polly on the list, who was usually in a House right at the other end of the town. ‘When all the signatures had been collected, it was back to your own House and into uniform in time for breakfast at eight o’clock. So that offenders couldn’t cheat by going round in the most convenient geographical order, or by getting up before seven, the official start time, the pollies on the list had to write down, next to their signatures, the exact time at which they were woken up. A stupid punishment really, as irritating for the pollies who were shaken awake as it was for the poor sod doing the running about. The system was open to massive abuse. Pollies could settle scores with colleagues they disliked by sending them tish callers every day for a week. Tit-f or-tat tish call wars between pollies could go on like this for whole terms. Of course pollies could do each other favours too. ‘Oh Braddock, there’s a not half scrummy scrumhalf in your Colts Fifteen, what’s his name?’ ‘What, Yelland you mean?’ ‘That’s the one. Rather fabulous. You ... er ... couldn’t find your way clear to sending him over one morning, could you? As a little tishie?’ ‘Oh, all right. If you’ll send me Finlay.’ ‘Done.’ The only really enjoyable part of the tish call for me was the burglary. Officially all the Houses were locked until seven, which was supposed to make it pointless to set off early and take the thing at a leisurely pace. But there were larder, kitchen and changing room windows that could be prised open and latches that could yield to a flexible sheet of mica. Once inside all you had to do was creep up to the dorm, tiptoe into the target polly’s tish, adjust his alarm clock and wake him. That way you could start the call at half-past five or six, bicycle about at a gentle pace and save yourself all the flap and faff of trying

123 to complete the whole run in forty minutes. That entire description of the tish call is lifted, almost whole, from The Liar, but then, when I wrote The Liar I lifted that description, almost whole, from my life, so it seems fair to take it back. Because of the simplicity with which the rules of the tish call game could be circumvented, because of the frisson of sexual possibility that they hinted at and because I always enjoyed early mornings anyway, they held no particular terror for me as a punishment. Some boys came away from being given a tish call with their faces white as a sheet. They would dutifully get up at the right time, actually get into full games kit, actually run from House to House, puffing and sweating, and actually shower before coming into breakfast and presenting their filled-in slip of paper to the polly who had punished them. I never presented it, always waited for the polly to chase me up, allowing him a moment’s triumphant thought that maybe I had actually dared not to do the tish call and that this time I was really for it. ‘Where is it, Fry?’ ‘Second on the left, you can’t miss it. Smells of urine and excrement.' ‘Don’t be clever. I gave you a triple tish call yesterday.’ ‘You did? Are you sure you’re not thinking of my brother?’ ‘Don’t be cheeky, you know bloody well.’ ‘I’m afraid it entirely slipped my mind.’ ‘What?’ ‘Yes. Awful, isn’t it?’ ‘Well, in that case...’ ‘And then I remembered, just in time. Here it is ... Copping’s signature is especially elegant don’t you think? Such a handsome swagger in the curve of the ... such careless grace in the down-swoop of that final “g”...’ Another duty to enjoy was that of Morning Fag. Most juniors hated it when their turn came round, but I counted off the days with mounting excitement. It involved some of the things I loved best: early mornings, the sound of my own voice, efficient service and a hint of eroticism. Maybe I should have been an airline steward... At seven-fifteen at the latest I would spring out of bed, get dressed and tiptoe out of the dormitory. I would go downstairs to the Hall, where the skivvies would be laying the table for breakfast, bid them good morning, maybe blag a slice of bread and butter off them and check my watch against the clock on the wall. Then upstairs to a table on the landing where was laid out a huge brass bell with a leather loop for a handle. At precisely half past seven I would lift the bell and start to ring. It was heavy and took three or four shakes before the clapper really set itself in rhythm. I would go to each of the dormitories in turn and then, ringing the bell furiously all the time, shout as loudly as I could in an incantatory chant that was identical to that of all morning fags, and is impossible to set down here without musical entablature: ‘Time half past seven!’ As soon as that had been done in the threshold of each of the four dormitories I would then have to dash from tish to tish waking each boy individually, counting — and this was the tricky part — backwards in five second increments. That is to say, I would have to tell them how long they had to go before ten to eight, which was the last time-call they received before eight o’clock and brekker.

124 Thus, entering each tish and shaking each shoulder I would yell in each ear, ‘eighteen minutes and forty-five seconds tooo go ... eighteen minutes and forty seconds tooo go ... eighteen minutes and thirty-five seconds tooo go’ and so on until the time for the next general cry and the next ring of the bell which came at twenty to eight. ‘Ten minutes toooooo go!’ was the chant, and then back to the tishes. ‘Nine minutes and twenty-five seconds tooo go. . . nine minutes and twenty seconds tooo go.. .‘ before returning to the bell and the final, triumphant pealing and roaring of: ‘TI-I-I-ME TEN TO EIGHT!’ By which time boys would be clattering and roaring and streaming past me, swearing, cursing, doing up their final buttons, foaming with toothpaste and bad temper. Some boys were terribly hard to wake, and if you didn’t succeed in rousing them fully and they were senior, they would blame you for not being up in time and make your life hell. Other boys were deliberately hard to wake and played secret unspoken games with you. They might sleep nude, under one sheet and present you as you entered the tish with all the signs of deep sleep and an innocent but perky morning erection. The unspoken game was that, as you tried to shake them awake by their shoulder, your elbow or a lower part of the arm might just accidentally rub against their twitching dick. Never a word spoken, this game sometimes went all the way, sometimes was just a little game. In my year as Morning Fag one got to know which boys played this game and which didn’t, just as they presumably got to know which Morning Fags played it, and which didn’t. This was before I had ever masturbated myself, and although I knew all the theory and was titillated by the idea of sex, I didn’t really get the whole fuss of it. At Stouts Hill I had already learned the hard way just how complex the attitude of the healthy boy was towards queering. At my last year at prep school, it had become very much the thing amongst a handful of us in our senior dormitory to do a fair amount of fooling around when the others were asleep. A couple of the boys were equipped with a set of fully operational testicles and bushy pubic undergrowth, others like me were not. I greatly enjoyed creeping over to another boy’s bed and having a good old rummage about. I never quite knew what it was that I enjoyed, and certainly the first time I saw semen erupt from a penis it gave me the fright of my life. I have to confess I found it frankly rather disgusting and wondered at nature’s eccentricity: like Noël Coward’s Alice I felt that things could have been organised better. One of the boys in that dorm, we’ll call him Halford, like me not fully ripened but of a sportive disposition, took the same pleasure that I did in wandering around the school naked. Together we would, with roaring stiffies, or what passed for roaring stiffies in our cases, creep around the bathrooms simply glorying in the fact of our nakedness. We might point and prod and giggle and fondle each other a little, and experiment with that curious squashing of dicks in closing doors and desk-lids that seems to please the young, but it was the nakedness and the secrecy that provided all the excitement we needed. One afternoon, this same Halford was climbing out of the swimming pool when he suddenly got the most terrible cramp in one leg. He yowled with pain, flopped forward on to the grass and started to thrash his legs up and down in agony. I was standing close by so I went and helped him up and then walked him around the pool until the cramp had gone. Fully recovered, he streaked away to change and I thought no more about it. As the afternoon wore on it became apparent to me that I seemed suddenly to have

125 become extremely unpopular. One is highly sensitive to these things at twelve, I was at least. Highly. My popularity rating was something I was more aware of than the most sophisticated political spin-doctor. But I simply couldn’t understand it. It must have been one of those rare afternoons when I knew I had done absolutely nothing wrong. It was bewildering, but inescapable: boys were cutting me dead, sneering openly at me, sending me to Coventry and falling sullenly silent when I entered rooms. At last I ran into someone who could explain. I found myself approaching a fat boy called McCallum in the corridor and he whispered something as I passed. ‘What did you say?’ I asked, stopping and spinning round. ‘Nothing,’ he said and tried to move on. McCallum was someone of little account and I knew that I could master him. ‘You muttered something just now,’ I said grasping him by both shoulders, ‘you will tell me what it was or I will kill you. It is that simple. I will end your life by setting fire to you in bed while you are asleep.’ McCallum was the sort of gullible panicky fool who took that kind of threat very seriously indeed. ‘You wouldn’t dare!’ he said, proving my point. ‘I most certainly would,’ I replied. ‘Now. Tell me what it was that you said just now.’ ‘I just said... I said.. .‘ he spluttered to a halt and coloured up. ‘Yes?’ I said. ‘I’m waiting. You just said... ‘I just said “Queer”.’ ‘Queer?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘You said “Queer”, did you? And why was that?’ ‘Everyone knows. Let me go.’ ‘Everyone knows,’ I said, strengthening my grip on his shoulders, ‘but me. What is it that everyone knows?’ ‘This afternoon.., ow! You’re hurting me!’ ‘Of course I’m bloody hurting you! Do you think I would be exerting this much pressure for any other reason? Go on. “This afternoon. . .“ you said.’ ‘When Halford got out of the pool...’ ‘Yes, what about it?’ ‘You... you put your arm round him like a queer. Halford is hopping mad. He wants to beat you up. In my shock, outrage, horror and indignation I let go of McCallum completely and he took his opportunity, scuttling away like a fat beetle, shouting ‘Queer!’ as he rounded the corner out of sight. I didn’t even remember putting my arm round Halford’s shoulder. I suppose I must have done as I had walked him round the pool. All the blood drained from my face and I came close to one of those early adolescent fainting fits which sometimes stay with you till late in life, a physical sensation that can overwhelm you if you stand up very suddenly — a feeling that you are close to blacking out and falling down. Halford thought I was queer because I had put my arm round him. Put my arm round him to support him! The very same Halford who was wandering naked with me around

126 the bathroom not two nights previously. The Halford who taught me how to shut my cock in a door. The Halford who did a backward somersault naked on the floor at me and pushed his finger up his arse, giggling. He thought I was queer? Queer for putting an arm round him when he had cramp? Jesus. I stumbled to a back stairway to try and find a private place to go and weep. I had got no further than the first landing when I walked straight into the hairy tweed jacket of Mr Bruce, history master and quondam internee of the Japanese Army. ‘Hello, hello, hello! What’s up here?’ The tears were streaming down my face and it was no good pretending it was hay fever. Racked with sobs, I explained about Halford's cramp and the disgust I had apparently caused him when just trying to be helpful. I did not, of course, mention our night time prowls in the nude, the sheer hypocrisy of Halford’s reaction, the unfairness and injustice and cruelty of which was what had really knocked me for six. Mr Bruce nodded gravely, gave me a handkerchief and disappeared. I crawled my way on up to a bed and lay there weeping until tea, when I decided that I might as well get used to my unpopularity and face the howling mob in the senior refectory. As I tried to wedge myself into my place on the bench, an artificially huge gap appeared as the boys either side made a huge show of distancing themselves from the disgusting homo who was polluting their table. Pale but resolute I started to eat my tea. Halfway through the meal a gong sounded. Everybody looked up in surprise. Mr Bruce was standing at the end of the room, an arm upraised for silence. ‘Boys,’ he said. ‘I have a special announcement to make. I have just heard of a heroic act of kindness that took place by the swimming-pool this afternoon. It seems that Halford got into difficulties with cramp and that Fry helped him to his feet and did exactly the right thing. He walked him about, supporting him carefully all the way. I am awarding Fry five merits for this sensible, cool action.’ I stared down at my plate, unable to move a single muscle. ‘Oh, by the way,’ continued Bruce, as if the thought had just struck him. ‘It has also come to my ears that some of the younger, sillier boys, who are ignorant about such things, think that someone putting their arm around a friend in distress is a sign of some sort of perversion. I look to you senior boys, who have a rather more sophisticated understanding of sexual matters, to quash this sort of puerile nonsense. I hope, incidentally, that Halford has thanked Fry properly for his promptness and consideration. I should think a hearty handshake and good manly bear-hug would be appropriate. That’s all.’ A squeak of brogues on floorboards and he was gone. After one and a half seconds of unbearable silence, palms began to rain down congratulatory thumps upon my back, Halford rose sheepishly from his bench to thank me and I was in favour once more. Ant Cromie writes me that Jim Bruce died a couple of years ago, God rest, nourish and soothe his immortal soul. He walks now with Montrose, William Wallace and Bonnie Prince Charlie himself. He saved my last term at Stouts Hill and I will honour his memory for ever. But does that, or does that not tell you something of the psychological minefield one trod through in those days, when it came to questions of sexual nature, of sexuality, as we would say now? The difference between sexual play and queering; the blind terror that

127 physical affection inspired, but the easy acceptance of erotic games. At Uppingham, much the same views obtained. Those whose morning prongers one brushed as Morning Fag did not think of themselves or of me as queer in any way at all. I am not sure anyone really knew what queer really, really meant. The very idea of it made everyone so afraid that each created their own meaning, according to their own dread of their own impulses. You could openly admire a pretty boy, and all the middle and senior boys did. It was a sign of manliness indeed to do so. ‘Just ten minutes alone, me and that arse.. .‘ a sixth former might say as a cute junior walked past. ‘That’s all I ask,’ he would add looking skywards in prayer. ‘Oh no!’ One senior would clutch another as they caught sight of a comely new boy, ‘I’m in love. Save me from myself.’ I think that the logic of it was that new boys, pretty boys, were the closest approximation Uppingham offered to girls. They were hairless in the right places and sweet and cute and comely like girls, they had fluffy hair and kissable lips like girls, they had cute little bottoms like ... well, they had cute little bottoms like boys, but hell, any port in a storm, and there’s no storm like pubescence and no port like a pretty boy’s bum. All that public swooning however, was no more than macho posture. It proved their heterosexuality. Some boys however had the most definite reputation for being queer, in the fully snarled out, spat out sense of the word as it was then used — before, that is to say, its triumphant reclamation by the proud homosexuals of today. I never quite understood how these reputations arose. Perhaps they came about because the accused had been caught looking furtively at someone of their own age in the showers — the furtiveness was more likely to earn you the label queer than open, frank inspection — perhaps they gave off some signal, nothing to do with campness or effeminacy, some signal that the healthy adolescent male responded to with hostility or guilt or desire. Perhaps it was all a dress- rehearsal for the tribal tomtomming of irrational rumour, bigotry and dislike, dressed up and explained as instinct, that today in the wider world decides daily on the nature, character and disposition of the well-known: that asserts Bob Monkhouse to be unctuous, David Mellor to be a creep, Peter Mandelson Machiavellian, John Selwyn Gummer odious and John Birt sinister. I certainly didn’t know. My own view is that most homophobia, if one wants to use that rather crummy word, has almost nothing to do with sex. ‘But have you any idea what these people actually do?’ Self-righteous members of the House of Commons loved standing to ask that question during our last parliamentary debate on the age of homosexual consent. ‘Shit-stickers, that’s what they are. Let’s be clear about that. We’re talking about sodomy here.’ Oh no you aren’t. You think you are, but you aren’t, you know. Buggery is far less prevalent in the gay world than people suppose. Anal sex is probably not much more common m homosexual encounters than it is in heterosexual. Buggery is not at the end of the yellow brick road somewhere over the homosexual rainbow, it is not the prize, the purpose, the goal or the fulfilment of homosexuality. Buggery is not the achievement which sees homosexuality move from becoming into being; buggery is not homosexuality’s realisation or destiny. Buggery is as much a

128 necessary condition of homosexuality as the ownership of a Volvo estate car is a necessary condition of middle-class family life, linked irretrievably only in the minds of the witless and the cheap. The performance of buggery is no more inevitable a part of homosexuality than an orange syllabub is an inevitable part of a dinner: some may clamour for it and instantly demand a second helping, some are not interested, some decide they will try it once and then instantly vomit. There are plenty of other things to be got up to in the homosexual world outside the orbit of the anal ring, but the concept that really gets the goat of the gay-hater, the idea that really spins their melon and sickens their stomach is that most terrible and terrifying of all human notions, love. That one can love another of the same gender, that is what the homophobe really cannot stand. Love in all eight tones and all five semitones of the word’s full octave. Love as agape, Eros and philos; love as romance, friendship and adoration; love as infatuation, obsession and lust; love as torture, euphoria, ecstasy and oblivion (this is beginning to read like a Calvin Klein perfume catalogue); love as need, passion and desire. All the rest of it, parking your dick up an arse, slurping at a helmet, whipping, frotting, peeing, pooing, squatting like a dog, dressing up in plastic and leather — all these go on in the world of boy and girl too: and let’s be clear about this, they go on more — the numbers make it so. Go into a sex shop, skim through some pornography, browse the Internet for a time, talk to someone in the sex industry. You think homosexuality is disgusting? Then, it follows, it follows as the night the day, that you find sex disgusting, for there is nothing done between two men or two women that is, by any objective standard, different from that which is done between a man and a woman. What is more, one begs to ask of these Tony Marlowes and Peregrine Worsthornes and Paul Johnsons, have the guts to Enquire Within. Ask yourselves what thoughts go through your head when you masturbate. If the physical act and its detail is so much more important to you than love, then see a doctor, but don’t spew out your sickness in column- inches, it isn’t nice, it isn’t kind, it isn’t Christian. And if the best you can do is quote the Bible in defence of your prejudice, then have the humility to be consistent. The same book that exhorts against the abomination of one man lying with another also contains exhortations against the eating of pork and shell-fish and against menstruating women daring to come near holy places. It’s no good functionalistically claiming that kosher diet had its local, meteorological purposes now defunct, or that the prejudice against ovulation can be dispensed with as superstition, the Bible that you bash us with tells you that much of what you do is unclean: don’t pick and choose with a Revealed Text — or if you do, pick and choose the good bits, the bits that say things like ‘Let he who is without sin cast the first stone’, or ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself’. And please, whatever you do, don’t tell us that what we do, either in love or lust, is unnatural. For one thing if what you mean by that is that animals don’t do it, then you are quite simply in factual error. There are plenty of activities or qualities we could list that are most certainly unnatural if you are so mad as to think that humans are not part of nature, or so dull- witted as to believe that ‘natural’ means ‘all natures but human nature’: mercy, for example, is unnatural, an altruistic, non-selfish care and love for other species is unnatural; charity is unnatural, justice is unnatural, virtue is unnatural, indeed — and this

129 surely is the point — the idea of virtue is unnatural, within such a foolish, useless meaning of the word ‘natural’. Animals, poor things, eat in order to survive: we, lucky things, do that too, but we also have Abbey Crunch biscuits, Armagnac, selle d’agneau, tortilla chips, sauce béarnaise, Vimto, hot buttered crumpets, Chateau Margaux, ginger- snaps, risotto nero and peanut-butter sandwiches — these things have nothing to do with survival and everything to do with pleasure, connoisseurship and plain old greed. Animals, poor things, copulate in order to reproduce: we, lucky things, do that too, but we also have kinky boots, wank-mags, leather thongs, peep-shows, statuettes by Degas, bedshows, Tom of Finland, escort agencies and the Journals of Anaïs Nin — these things have nothing to do with reproduction and everything to do with pleasure, connoisseurship and plain old lust. We humans have opened up a wide choice of literal and metaphorical haute cuisine and junk food in many areas of our lives, and as a punishment, for daring to eat the fruit of every tree in the garden, we were expelled from the Eden the animals still inhabit and we were sent away with the two great Jewish afflictions to bear as our penance: indigestion and guilt. I will apologise for many things that I have done, but I will not apologise for the things that should never be apologised for. It is a little theory of mine that has much exercised my mind lately, that most of the problems of this silly and delightful world derive from our apologising for those things which we ought not to apologise for, and failing to apologise for those things for which apology is necessary. For example none of the following is shameful or deserves apology, in spite of our suicidal attempts to convince ourselves otherwise: • To possess a rectum, a urethra and a bladder and all that pertain thereto. • To cry. • To find anything or anyone of any gender, age or species sexually attractive. • To find anything or anyone of any gender, age or species sexually unattractive. • To insert things in one’s mouth, anus or vagina for the purpose of pleasure. • To masturbate as often as one wishes. Or not. • To swear. • To be filled with sexual desires that involve objects, articles or parts of the body irrelevant to procreation. • To fart. • To be sexually unattractive. • To love. • To ingest legal or illegal drugs. • To smell of oneself and one’s juices. • To pick one’s nose. I spend a lot of time tying knots in my handkerchief reminding myself that those are things not to be ashamed of, so long as they are not performed in sight or sound of those who would be pained — which also holds true of Morris dancing, talking about Terry Pratchett and wearing velour and many other harmless human activities. Politeness is all. But, I fear I spend far too little time apologising for or feeling ashamed about things which really do merit sincere apology and outright contrition.

130 • Failing to imagine what it is like to be someone else. • Pissing my life away. • Dishonesty with self and others. • Neglecting to pick up the phone or write letters. • Not connecting made or processed objects • with their provenance. • Judging without facts. • Using influence over others for my own ends. • Causing pain. I will apologise for faithlessness, neglect, deceit, cruelty, unkindness, vanity and meanness, but I will not apologise for the urgings of my genitals nor, most certainly, will I ever apologise for the urgings of my heart. I may regret those urgings, rue them deeply and occasionally damn, blast and wish them to hell, but apologise — no: not where they do no harm. A culture that demands people apologise for something that is not their fault: that is as good a definition of a tyranny as I can think of. We British are not, praise the Lord, in Stalinist Russia, Nazi Germany or Baptist Alabama, but that does not mean, and has never meant, that we must therefore reside in the fields of Elysium. Bloody hell, I do rattle on, don’t I? Doth the lady, once again, protest too much? I don’t think so. And if I am protesting, it is not on my own behalf, but on the behalf of my fourteen-year-old self and its confusion. I knew then, knew I was queer. I had no idea, no idea at all, what anybody else meant by the word: all that inconsistency, that subtle coding that allowed one both to leer at pretty boys’ bottoms and to sneer at faggots, it confused me and it rattled me, but it never stopped me knowing. I knew I was queer for all kinds of reasons. I knew because I just plain knew, and I knew for that negative reason which is so easy to demonstrate to oneself: my loins never twitched at female bodies or the thought of them, there is simply no escaping such a primitive ineluctable fact and its implications. I knew that I could like and love women as friends, because since childhood I had always found the company of women and girls welcome and easy, but I knew just as strongly that I would never be aroused or excited at the thought of any physical intimacy with a girl, that I would never yearn to share my life with a female. There was physical evidence of women at Uppingham only in the two-dimensional shape of the copies of Forum and Penthouse that were self-consciously passed around from boy to boy like joints at a teenage party, or in the three-dimensional shape of the kitchen-staff and the girls one saw in the town. Lest anyone think such an atmosphere is enough to make any child homosexual, I should say that most of the boys in the same situation as me (my brother included, whose home life, let’s face it, was identical to mine) lived, breathed, ate and drank girls. One boy whom I have already described to you, but whose blushes I shall spare, was in fact expelled for a sexual liaison with one of the kitchen girls. He could no more have been made homosexual by his time at Uppingham than I could have been made straight by a stint at Holland Park Comprehensive or Cheltenham Ladies’ College. I think it is certainly true that our circumstances made it very difficult for some of the boys around me to cope with girls, but then you see I believe that all boys find it very difficult to cope with girls,

131 and none of my straight friends who went to mixed state schools has ever told me anything different. I operate a sympathetic and comprehensive listening service for many friends in relationship difficulties (as they do for me when I’m brave enough to let them) and from all I have ever heard (or read in the autobiographies of others) sex is every bit as difficult, awkward, embarrassing and heart-rending for the straight as for the bent. But knowing I was homosexual was one thing, disentangling its meaning (both its perceived cultural meaning and the real meaning it was to have to me) was very difficult. I was, as I have said, not yet masturbating, I had no definable physical or sexual appetites to assuage. All I had was a void, an ache, a hunger, a hiatus, a lacuna, a gap, a need. There’s pleonasm for you... I remember being at the bedside of a boy at prep school, playing with his (as it seemed to me at the time) colossal and strainingly hard penis. I stared at this phenomenon and — I can recall this scene so exactly in my mind in its every detail — I thought to myself: What now? I know this is fun, this has meaning, this is part of something big, but what now? Do I eat it? Do I kiss it? Do I try and merge with it, become one with it? Do I cut it off and take it back to my own bed? Do I try and stuff it into my ear? What is this supposed to lead to? I don’t find this cock attractive or pretty, in fact it’s frankly rather ugly, but I do know this, it is part of something that matters. For all my foregoing rant at those who believe homosexuality is simply about buggery, I should make it clear that I was not asserting that homosexuality has nothing to do with sex, I was merely trying to suggest that the sexual element is not what threatens and unhinges the homophobe. Does homosexuality involve sex? Oh dear me yes, homosexuality involves sex. It involves sexual appeal, stimulation, excitement, arousal and ultimately, of course, orgasm. There can’t be any doubt about that. There is love too and love is bigger than anything else in the world as you know, but that doesn’t mean sex isn’t in there too, doing its best to simplify things. If only it were only about sex ... how simple and jolly homosexuality would be, how simple and jolly heterosexuality would be. Still, at least we get Shakespeare and Tolstoy and Beethoven and Cole Porter as a reward for all the pain and heartache. I had been there then, at the bedside, worshipping at the throne of the cockhead as it were, knowing that this was something that was always going to have meaning for me. But it was disconnected, it was just a great gristly fat thing — all the poor lad wanted was for me to finish him off so that he could get to sleep of course, he had no interest at all in my psychic or romantic destiny — but for me this thing in my hands was at once a potent symbol of something that mattered and just a dick belonging to another boy, nothing more; the very disconnectedness of this dick, coupled with its swollen urgency and such a perplexed presentiment in me of the momentous weight and meaning such scenes as this were to have in my life, made the whole experience, and the dick itself, highly absurd, highly comic and very slightly frightening. So I giggled. 4 The beginning of my second year at Uppingham saw me no more clued up about this whole business of sex than I ever had been: I probably had a clearer idea of the terms and

132 their meanings: cunnilingus, urinobibe, Fallopian tubes, epididymus, snatch, pussy, tit, jizz and clit, I knew the words all right. But then I knew what a diminished seventh was, but it didn’t mean I could play or sing. I knew what a googly was and I still couldn’t bowl a cricket ball without causing twenty-one boys to collapse in a heap of laughter. Knowledge is not always power. The erotic in life did not occupy me or engage my attention much because I was still neither physically developed nor sexually aware enough to have that need to ‘get my bloody rocks off’ that seemed so to exercise the other boys, passing their Penthouses, sniggers, phwors and Kleenex boxes from study to study. Games and how to avoid them, that was still what mattered most to me. Sweets and where to get them from, that too. Sex, that could take a powder. And then... And then I saw him and nothing was ever the same again. The sky was never the same colour, the moon never the same shape: the air never smelt the same, food never tasted the same. Every word I knew changed its meaning, everything that once was stable and firm became as insubstantial as a puff of wind, and every puff of wind became a solid thing I could feel and touch. This is where language is so far behind music. The chord that Max Steiner brings in when Bogart catches sight of Bergman in his bar in Casablanca, how can I bring that into a book of black ink marks on white paper? The swell and surge of the Liebestod from Tristan, Liszt’s Sonata in B minor — even Alfred Brendel can’t conjure that up from this keyboard, this alphanumeric piano beneath my fingers. Maybe, because sometimes pop music can hit the mark as well as anything, I could write you out a playlist. We would start with the Monkees: Then I saw her face, now I’m a believer Naaah... it’s no use. There’s nothing for it but old words and cold print. Besides, you’ve been there yourself. You’ve been in love. Why am I getting so hysterical? Just about every film, every book, every poem, every song is a love story. This is not a genre with which you are unfamiliar even if by some fluke (whether a cursed fluke or a blessed one I would be the last to be able to decide) you have never been there yourself. It was the first morning of the winter term, the beginning of my second year at Uppingham. After breakfast, as was usual, I went to my study, now newly shared with Jo Wood, and collected the textbooks and blocks I would need for the morning’s teaching. A block was a pad of paper, special Uppingham-sized paper, shorter and squarer than A4, which could only be bought from the official school bookshop: essays, notes and everything else had to be written on paper from a block. The routine at a school with boarding-houses goes like this, you see. The Morning

133 Fag awakens you. You breakfast in your House, you walk into school for chapel and morning lessons and you don’t return to the House until lunchtime. All the form-rooms, science labs and sports halls, the Chapel, Hall and Library, they are grouped around the main school. Ekker (eugh!), then back to the House for showers (don’t get me started ...) followed by afternoon lessons in school and another (sometimes the last of the day) return to the House for supper. After supper there’s a little free time before a bell will go, summoning you, if you are a junior, to hall where you do your prep (which means homework), supervised and kept silent by the praepostor on duty. If you’re a senior, your prep is done in the privacy of your study. Then there’s some more free time in which, unless through some infraction of the rules you’ve been gated (no doubt they now use the Americanism ‘grounded’, as in ‘your ass is grounded, Mister’), you can go down to the Art School or the Thring Centre (named after the side-whiskers and containing electric typewriters, design studios, pottery shops and so forth: it has since been replaced by a splendid complex called, rather wetly in my opinion, The Leonardo Centre, designed by Old Uppinghamian architect Piers Gough and containing a TV studio, computers and all manner of larky toys) or you can see a play, listen to a concert, attend a lecture, go to play rehearsals, turn up for choir practice, or band practice or orchestra practice, or a meeting of the chess club, bridge club, judo club, poetry reading group, entomological society or whatever gathering of like minds suits your taste. Then it’s back to the House in time for evening prayers, which are taken by the housemaster or the House Tutor, a master who hasn’t got his own House yet and acts as a sort of locum to the housemaster proper from time to time. Then, essentially, it’s cocoa, buns, biscuits and bed — the whole cycle to repeat itself the following day. On Saturdays, evening prayers take the form of a more informal compline. On Sundays, there are no games and no lessons, just two compulsory hours in your study that go under the strange name of Sunday Qs, short for Sunday Questions and designed, no doubt, to inculcate religiosity, healthiness and inward spiritual cleanliness. Dotted throughout the day in House there is a series of call-overs, what they called appel in prisoner-of-war films. A list of all the boys in order of seniority downwards will be read out by the House-captain, and each boy has to call ‘Here’ at the sound of his name. One thinks of Rowan Atkinson’s inspired Schoolmaster sketch, or that creepy play by Giles Cooper which was turned into a film with David Hemmings, the title of which came from the last three names of the roll... Unman, Wittering and Zigo. There. If you require any more information and believe in Buddhism, I suggest you live your life wickedly and get reborn as a middle-class English boy in the mid-1950s: you’ll get the experience firsthand. So, back to Day Two, Term Four. I had stuffed what I needed for morning lessons into my briefcase and Jo Wood and I walked together out of our study and down the corridor that led to the path that led to the road that led to School. Four Houses were up at our end of town, Brooklands and Highfield were two. Brooklands was further away from the centre of Uppingham, so far away indeed, that it had its own swimming-pool. Opposite my House, Fircroft, was the Middle, that huge playing field I told you about, and perched next to it was Highfield, so named because it was on top of a hill and by a field. The fourth House was a little further down the hill, towards the town and school, and we will call this House Redwood’s.

134 Redwood’s doesn’t exist. There is no House between Highfields and the bottom of the hill. I want nothing I write in this book to cause anyone needless pain, shame or embarrassment. Everything I write will be true according to the light of my own memory, but the truth will be told with tact and with due recognition of fiction’s often greater capacity to convey reality than can any bald recitation of fact. Some names and the setting, styling and structure of some scenes must be fictionalised. I do not believe you will always be able to tell which scenes and which settings, nor would I want you to try. You have stayed with me thus far and must trust me when I say that although there is rearrangement, there is no exaggeration or sensationalisation. If anything the contrary might be the case, for certain scenes and events of my school life, however heavily disguised, would enable any school contemporary of mine instantly to ascribe names and identities, and that would be grossly unfair. Two people, if they read this book, will recognise themselves but see that they have been well enough disguised for no one else to know but themselves who they really are. Enough already, Stephen — cut to the chase. It is a clear mid-September day, the kind of day that contains in exactly equal proportion a mix of summer and of autumn, the leaves are not yet in their October reds, golds and yellows, but their greenness is becoming just a little shagged by now, not as brightly, squeakily sappily green as it was in midsummer. To make up for it the light has lost its August haze and has a great softness, the rotten marshy smells of late summer have been dispelled too and there is a nutty, barky freshness in the air. Naturally, academic hours are the same throughout the whole school, so as we Fircroftians walk out on to the road, we join a stream of Brooklanders walking towards school, and a crowd of boys from Highfield cross the road towards us, for there is no pavement on their side; as we move down the hill, boys from Redwood’s will cross over too, so that the observer looking down the dip of the London road from the centre of Uppingham at the right time will see a third of the school swarming towards him, two hundred boys dressed in identical black jackets, black trousers, black ties, black waistcoats, black shoes and white shirts, lugging their briefcases and if, poor sods they are slated for PE that morning, their duffle bags as well. Pollies will bicycle alongside whistling or twang-humming Claptonian guitar-licks, their boaters tipped at what they hope is an angle that says, ‘Boaters are fucking square, man. I wear mine, like ironically ... ‘Yes, but you still wear it. You don’t have to, you know. I once got out my old Stouts Hill boater and wore it to school. This enraged a School Pig I encountered on the way. ‘And just what the fuck do you think you’re doing wearing a boater?’ ‘But this isn’t a boater, Merrick, it’s a sun-hat. I am highly susceptible to excess heat.’ ‘You’ll be highly susceptible to a kick up the arse if you don’t take it off.’ This morning though, I’m thinking of nothing in particular. Still settling back into the rhythm and enjoying the fact that there is a whole crop of new boys who are now the lowest of the low. Indeed, I have to train one of them for the fag test. I will be taking my 0 levels this year. Fourteen seems a young age for them, but in those days, if they reckoned you could do them, you did them. I would take my A levels





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




135 two years later and leave school at sixteen, then university at seventeen, that was my future, all charted out before me. That was how things were done then. If they felt you needed an extra year to cope with 0 levels, you were put into a form called the Remove. At prep school there had been a Remove and a Shell. I had been in Shell and I never understood quite what it meant. I know, I’ll look it up in the OED. Well, bless my soul. Does one live and learn, or what? 15. The apsidal end of the schoolroom at Westminster School, so called from its conch-like shape. Hence, the name of the form (intermediate between the fifth and sixth) which originally tenanted the shell at Westminster School, and transf. of forms (intermediate between forms designated by numbers) in other public schools; see quots. 1736 Gend. Mag. VI. 679/2 Near these (forms] ye shell’s high concave walls appear. 1750 Chesterfield Lett. ccxxviii, Observe., what the best scholars in the Form immediately above you do, and so on, till you get into the shell yourself. 1825 Southey Life & Corr. (1849) I. 151 He was floated up to the Shell, beyond which the tide carried no one. 1857 Hughes Tom Brown i. v, The lower fifth, shell, and all the junior forms in order [at Rugby]. 1877 W. P. Lennox Celebr. I have known I. 43 The noise grew louder and louder, until the birch was safely deposited in a small room behind the shell, as the upper end of the room was called from its shape [Westminster]. 1884 Forshall Westm. Sch. 3 The Headmaster faced all the boys excepting the tenants of the Shell. 1903 Blackw. Mag. June 7 42/2 The third shell, a form within measurable distance of the lowest in the school [Harrow]. Well, there you go then. There was no shell at Uppingham so far as I remember. Actually, I am feeling rather pleased with myself as I walk along with Jo Wood this morning because the new form I have been put in this year is Upper IVA. This is more luck than a reflection of any academic brilliance from me during my first year: the school alternated annually between awarding the A status to the top English set and the top Maths set — all part of that good all-round chap ‘philosophy’. This year it is the turn of English, so I find myself in Upper IVA and all the brilliant mathematicians have to put up with the indignity of being grouped in Upper IVB. You can be in the top form of your year, but be in lower sets according to subject. So I was in the top sets for English, History, French, Latin and so on, but in the bottom for Physics, Maths and Chemistry. Geography I had given up in favour of German. My form-master and English teacher I find to be an :excellently civilised man called J. B. Stokes, housemaster of Meadhurst, given to a most peculiar use of what, if I have parsed this correctly, is an imperative interrogative form of a future conditional tense. In

136 other words instead of saying ‘Shut up’ he would say, ‘You’ll be shutting up?’, ‘You’ll be sitting down?’ It is too early in the season to shuffle leaves along the pavement as we walk down the hill, but Jo and I have our heads bowed down towards the pavement none the less. As a child one gets to know every crack in every paving stone on every section of one’s walk to school. Are we looking down because we don’t want to see or because we don’t want to be seen? I don’t know what it is that makes me look up. A vague awareness I suppose that the boys from Redwood’s opposite are crossing the road from their House to join the pavement, a little good-natured jostling might result, and the thick black line of boys will have swollen to its maximum size before the left turn, up the Chocolate Block, along the Magic Carpet and towards the Chapel, whose bell even now is ringing us to morning prayers. His head isn’t even turned towards me but I know. How is that possible? How can it be that just the gait of him, the stand of him, the shape and turn away of him, can be enough for me to know and to know at once? Looking at it coolly one can say that anyone might be drawn to such a fine head of fair hair, seen from behind. One might say that anyone could see that this was a classy, peachy and supreme pair of buttocks confronting us. One might add too, in cynical tones, ‘You say “you knew”, but just suppose he had turned his head and revealed the face of a pig with a harelip, a twisted nose and a squint, would you now be writing this?’ Did I really, really know? Yes, reader, I did. I swear I did. The moment I lifted my head from the pavement and glanced across the road I saw, amongst the Redwood’s boys crossing, one of their number looking the other way, as if to check that there was no traffic coming. And at that moment, before his face came into view, it happened. The world changed. If he had turned out to be ugly, I think my heart would have sunk, but still the world would have been different, because that thing that stirred and roared in me would have been awakened anyway and nothing could ever have put it back to sleep. As it is, he was not ugly. He was the most beautiful thing I had ever seen in my life. I stopped dead so suddenly that a boy behind walked straight into me. ‘Watch where you’re going, you dozy tosser... ‘Sorry.’ Jo turned patiently and gave me the sour, constipated look that was peculiarly his own and had caused his nickname to be ‘Woodeeeeee’ pronounced in the tones of one who groans on the lavatory, clutching the seat as he strains violently to disgorge a turd the size of Manchester. ‘What have you forgotten?’ he said. He must have assumed that I had stopped because I had suddenly realised that I had left a vital textbook behind in the study. I knew from the heat in my cheeks that my face

137 had turned the fieriest red imaginable. I somehow found the presence of mind to mumble, ‘Laces,’ and stoop to fiddle with my shoes. When I stood, the redness in my face, I hoped, might seem to be the result of my head having hung upside-down while I was lacing, a strategy that every human being uses to cover a blush and which fools no one. I was up quickly though and immediately I started to walk forwards. I had to see that face again. He had just reached the pavement and gave now the smallest, quickest of glances back up the hill, in our direction. Our eyes didn’t meet, but I saw that he was even more beautiful than I had supposed. Even more beautiful than I had ever imagined it was possible to imagine imagining beauty. Beautiful in a way that made me realise that I had never even known before what beautiful really meant: not in people, nature, taste or sound. There are many in Norfolk for whom ‘big city’ means Norwich. ‘I been to Norwich once and I didn’t like it,’ they say. ‘Swaffham’s big enough for me.’ They can only guess at what London, Los Angeles or Manhattan might be like. I realised at this moment that I had only ever experienced the townships of ‘charming’, ‘pretty’, ‘attractive’, ‘comely’, ‘sweet’, ‘delicious’, ‘handsome’ and ‘cute’ and now I had finally penetrated the city limits of Beautiful. I was instantly aware of Beauty and the whole Greek and Keatsian fuss about it made sense. Just as when an artist shows you a new view of something — as Matisse for example might show you a quality in an apple that you had never noticed before and from then on you are able to see that same quality in every apple you encounter — so I would from this second onwards be able forever to see beauty, real beauty, in familiar things all around me. Before this moment I may have thought a particular sunrise or hillside was stunning or attractive but after this moment I would be able to see beauty there. Absolute beauty. ‘What the fuck is going on?’ said Jo, panting to keep up with me as I strode forwards. This apparition was now perhaps three ranks forward of me. I could see that he was shorter than average. He wore the same uniform as everyone else, but it was transformed, as even the air around him was transformed. ‘Don’t want to be late, do we?’ I said. ‘You’re off your fucking trolley,’ grunted Jo. If I could just hear the voice, maybe draw alongside and steal a look at the profile... Then I saw Maudsley just ahead of me, a Fircroft sixth former and a rugger colour, nudge his neighbour and I heard him say in a voice too loud to be borne: ‘D’you see that one, then? Fer-uck me! Herwow!’ He shook his right hand backwards and forwards as if it had just been burned. ‘I mean get the buns on it... My heart sank and the blood hammered in my ears. ‘Now what?’ Jo was as patient as a man can get, but even he had limits. I had almost stopped again. ‘Nothing, sorry ... nothing. Sorry, I just ... nothing.’ It was unbearable, unbearable to think of a great ape like Maudsley even so much as looking. I knew at once, in an instant churn of misery that there would be others, others smitten by this thing, this vision, this impossibility. They would be cruder, they would be more obvious, their motives would be baser and, of course, of double-course they would be more attractive. They would be so much more attractive, so much more co-ordinated, so much more graceful, so much more seductive in their status and appeal. They would take my holy flame and extinguish it with thick thudding yellow wads of filthy spunk,

138 snuff it to a hissing nothing in a hairy slimeball of lust. It was too terrible. They were looking at Sex. I knew they were, while I — I was looking at Beauty. ‘Now calm down, Stephen,’ you are saying. ‘We know you’re a poof. We know too, because let’s face it you’ve rubbed our bloody noses in it enough times, that you don’t deny sex, or the sex-drive in you. Don’t kid us that this “holy flame” of yours was some kind of pure abstracted love with no erotic overtones.’ I am telling you the feelings that ran through me and, painfully predictable and mimsy and effete and bloodless as they may seem, those were my feelings, arrived at in my head in less time than it takes for light to travel a yard. But I tell you another thing too with my hand on my heart and my fingers uncrossed. Although I was to develop, like every male, into an enthusiastic, ardent and committed masturbator, he was never once, nor ever has been, the subject of a masturbatory fantasy. Many times I tried to cast him in some scene I was directing for the erotic XXXX cinema in my head, but it always happened that some part of me banished him from the set, or else the very sight of him on screen m the coarse porn flick running in my mind had the effect of a gallon of cold water. Sex was to enter our lives, but he was never wank fodder, never. Jo Wood, a man of instinct and sense, knew that something was wrong and knew that it was something inward and strange, so he didn’t call me on the oddity of my behaviour as we walked along, boys now four deep between me and the revelation. We swarmed left and along the Chocolate Block, up the steps — I could see a grace in the upstride of his right leg that was entirely new to me, and I saw too Maudsley once more nudging his neighbour and heard the Kenneth Connor, under-the-breath ‘Phwoo-oo- oor...‘ that accompanied the nudge. We passed the old Victorian study block to our right and the library to our left and filed along the shining cobbles of the Magic Carpet that wound like a brown river through a field of dirty-pink asphalt until it reached the colonnade. The chapel bell tolled louder and louder in my head until I thought it might explode. I had to see where he would leave his briefcase. That much I had to see. The main entrance to the chapel was like a sort of miniature of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington DC: Edward Thring sat sternly in a stern throne, his monstrous paternalist whiskers sternly set in white marble, not a boy that walked by him but the Reverend Edward stared through his soul and despised what he saw. We passed that entrance and headed for the colonnade. The colonnade was open on two sides and, on its two closed sides, notices, posters and announcements fluttered from green baize, attached by brass drawing pins. Headman’s noticeboard was first, white gnomic memoranda, then came others, Gestetnered Roneo-ed or hand-written, with their announcements of Corps Field Days (‘the u/mentioned will muster at 1525 hrs .. .‘) special matches of ‘Second Fifteen Possibles v. Third Fifteen Probables’ (per-lease.. .), calls for volunteers to join a new Speleological Club that was being founded, ‘Apply Andrews, J. G. (M)’ and other such dribbling toss that Fry, S. J. (F) found insupportably dull. The purpose of the colonnade that day, so far as I was concerned, was to leave my briefcase there before entering chapel and to see where he left his. It was a remarkable sight, on those days when one was late for chapel, to see the colonnade empty of humans, but with six hundred briefcases and a hundred duffle bags dumped at the feet of its columns or leaning against the base of its inner walls.

139 You could tell he was a new boy. Just the way he checked others to see how they left their briefcases, as a shy girl at a disco might check how the other girls are dancing. He found a spot to leave his, brand new it was and of deep tan leather. I suddenly hated mine, which was black. I had thought black was cool, but now I knew I had to get a brown briefcase. I would make a point of wanting one for Christmas. ‘But darling, yours is almost brand new! And it cost the earth!’ I’d cross that bridge when I came to it. For the moment, I must put my hideous black next to his glorious tan. Some boys had their initials classily branded into the leather or trashily attached with gold stick-on letters. He was standing by his as I approached, but facing the other way and scanning the crowd of boys approaching from other directions. Good God, would he always face the other way? I plonked my briefcase down by his with a loud but cheerful sigh, a sigh that seemed to say, ‘Heigh ho. Here we go. Another term. Tch! Blimey!’ He turned. He turned towards me. ‘Excuse me ... A voice that ... it was unbroken, but it had a huskiness to it that stopped it from piping in a childish squeak. If he sang, he would sing alto. ‘Help at all?’ I found myself saying in the most cheerful, friendly, charming, relaxed and relaxing way those words have ever been said. And for the first time I looked into his eyes. They were blue, not light blue, but a darker blue. Not so dark as sapphire blue, not so bright as china blue. They were romantically blue. Lyrically blue. They swam and I swam in them. ‘I was wondering ...‘ he said, ‘which is West Block?’ This was, of course, his first day. His first day, and the first day of my life too. ‘Look behind you,’ I said, finding time to marvel at the calm in my voice and the strength and the confidence that it carried. ‘Think Colditz. Think Lubyanka. Behold, West Block. Got a lesson there have you? First after chapel?’ I watched how the hair at the back of his head fell and, as it stopped before reaching the collar, how it turned fractionally inwards and upwards in a way that made me think for an instant of a medieval boy king. Under it, a vee of lighter hairs herring-boned up the hollow of his nape. ‘Oh Christ help me,’ I croaked inwardly. ‘Christ Jesus help me.’ He turned back and looked up at me once more. Yes, he was shorter than average, shorter, but not delicate. ‘And that’s the door you go in, is it?’ Such a delicious caramel huskiness rising from the throat. Let me not faint, I pleaded. Following the direction in which he pointed I nodded. Simply the act of his raising his arm caused something trapped within me to leap and pummel against the inside of my chest and beg to be let out. ‘Who’ve you got?’ I asked. ‘Finch. J S. Finch, is it?’ ‘Aiee! French or German?’ ‘French.’ ‘Ah, I have him for German. Good luck, that’s all I can say...' ‘What’s he like?’ I followed across his eyes the passage of a small cloud of doubt or fear and noted with joyness of joy that a smile from me at once dispelled it.

140 ‘Naa, he’s okay. He shouts and he screams and he swears, but he’s okay. You’re in Redwood’s aren’t you?’ ‘How do you know that?’ Almost a hint of pertness in the speed and directness of the question. New boys would usually stutter with ers and ums and excuse me s when asking something of an elder. But I liked this freshness. It fell short of cheek. It was just …direct. One human being to another. He wanted to know how I knew, and so he asked. I jerked my head in the direction of his duffle bag whose regulation navy blue was piped in a dusty, crushed-strawberry red. ‘Your House colours tell the story,’ I said and, shifting my gaze further along, added, ‘see that one? Yellow piping. That’s Fircroft and that’s —‘ A juddering thump on my back. ‘Fry, you spawn of Satan, do you realise we’re in the same Latin set?’ Gunn, from School House: fancied himself an intellectual and a wit. I despised him in that cordial way people will hate those who are too like themselves for comfort. ‘But I thought I was in the top Latin set!’ I exclaimed in mock horror. ‘How come I’ve been demoted to the derr-brains?’ Shit! He will hear that stupid insult and know it for what it is. He will think me arrogant. I half turned, but he had gone. I turned fully round, in time to see the last of him rounding the corner towards the rear entrance to the Chapel. ‘In love are we? Where the hell did that pop up from?’ ‘Who?’ ‘Oh Jesus, Fry,’ said Gunn grinning with hideous superiority. ‘For such a good liar, you’re a terrible liar.’ In chapel, the boys sat in blocks arranged according to their House. Each term the Houses would move their position within the chapel. Fircroft this term were sitting near the back and Redwood’s were way up at the front. I found a place between Jo and Richard Fawcett and scanned the backs of heads until I found his. He sat between two boys, one brown- haired the other blond like him. Both were taller. Yet I would have known. If I had seen him for the first time just then, twenty rows ahead, his golden head smaller in my field of view than a sixpenny bit, still I would have known. But what was his name? How was I ever going to find out his name? Suppose his name was somehow wrong? Suppose it was an average name like Richard or Simon or Mark or Robert or Nigel? That would be so dull. Suppose he were a Neil or a Kenneth or a Geoffrey, how could I bear that? Suppose, God help him, he were a Stephen? I always hated my name. Later on I was to be cheered up and resigned to it by James Joyce’s use of it for his hero, and by the thought of Stephen Tennant and Stephen Spender, but at the time I thought it a stupid, styleless name, a name that only a boy could have and rather an uninteresting boy at that. Then again he might have an obvious name, the sort of name that would make people giggle and think him a tart. He might be a Rupert or a Julian or a Crispin or a Tim or, Lord save us, a Miles, Giles or Piers. I thought of names that I could tolerate. Ben would be about all right, as would Charles or Thomas or James or William. Jonathan? Hm ... Jonathan would be just about within the bounds. Nathan might be pushing it a bit though. Daniel and Samuel I could cope with and Peter, Christopher and

141 George, but Paul was right out. Francis was not to be entertained for a second and Frederick was just too silly for words. Roderick, Alexander or Hugh might pass, if he was Scottish. Donald would be uninteresting, Hamish would be pushing it too far and Ian simply horrid. David? That would be acceptable, I decided. David I could live with. There again as Bertie Wooster had pointed out, some pretty rough work is pulled at the font sometimes, maybe his parents had had a rush of blood to the head and chosen Hilary or Vivian or Evelyn? Maybe there was some rich uncle to please and he had found himself baptised Everett, Warwick, Hadleigh or Poynton? Then there were the Grahams and Normans and Rodneys. Impossible. Justin, Damian and Tristram. No! A thousand times, no. But then again, as the sun streamed in through the window and lit his hair, blinding all other boys from sight, it seemed to me that he could transform any name and make it holy, just as he transformed and sanctified his uniform and his briefcase and duffle bag. Even if he were Dennis or Terry or Neville or Keith, somehow those names would rise above the commonplace. He could probably even do something to Gavin. The service passed in a blur of such speculation and, after we had sung the school hymn reserved for the first mornings of term — Rank by rank again we stand By the four winds gathered hither — the whole school developing sudden joyful rhotacisms for the first line so that wank by wank again we stood, I shuffled out with the others in prescribed order and, by the time I reached my briefcase, his was gone, gone to face the perils of Finch and French in West Block. When would I see him again? How could I see him again for more than a few fleeting seconds? Maybe you are not aware how difficult it was for there to be any real social congress between boys of different years in the same House. For there to be friendships between boys in different Houses… well, he might as well have lived on the moon. I looked towards the West Block and Finch’s formroom with a sigh, picked up my horrid, horrid black briefcase and headed for double English. As flies to wanton boys are we to the gods; They undo us for their sport. Thus I oh-so wittily misquoted that morning. Stokes was gracious enough to smile, merely pointing out that I had played merry hell with Shakespeare’s scansion. I replied tartly that ‘to the gods’ was bad scansion already, delivering eleven syllables and mucking up an iamb. I offered the opinion that Shakespeare had been too cowardly to write the metrically perfect: As flies to wanton boys are we to God; He kills us for his sport.

142 — to which Stokes correctly replied that to singularise God, aside from courting disaster from the censor, destroying the pagan atmosphere of the play and the whole line of Gloucester’s thought, would also weaken the image by mismatching with the plural ‘boys’ — or would I have Shakespeare ruin the rhythm again with As flies to a wanton boy are we to God — is that what I wanted? Besides, it was perfectly possible for an actor to say ‘to the’ as if the words had but one syllable. I conceded that maybe old Shakespeare had known what he was up to after all, and on we moved, leaving me to my thoughts. Where would he go for morning break? The Upper Buttery or the Lower? Would someone have told him about Lanchberrys’ exceedingly fine cream slices? I made my way there, scanning every fair-haired head as I went. Fate can be kind to lovers, in her cruel, careless way. As far as the gods are concerned we are indeed as flies to wanton boys. They put us under a magnifying glass, laugh if the sun focuses its rays through the lens and burns us up with a pop; they stamp on us, squash us, swat us and collect us together in jars to be fed to favoured reptiles. I saw him moving down the steps towards the entrance to the Lower Buttery. He was talking to a boy from his House. A boy I knew! Nick Osborne was in my German set, a creep I had always thought, but suddenly I decided that he was my best friend. I forced my way down, not caring whom I pushed aside, not hearing the oaths, not feeling the kicks and thumps that came in riposte. ‘Osborne!’ I called. He turned. They both turned. ‘Oh Fry,’ said Osborne. ‘My brother,’ he added, lazily flapping a hand towards the divinity. His brother. His brother! His-brother-his-brother-his-brother. ‘Hello,’ I said, with just such a casual but polite air as one might employ when being introduced to the insignificant little brother of any friend. ‘Oh,’ I went on, ‘weren’t you the one who had Finch this morning?’ He nodded with a shy smile. He seemed pleased that I could have remembered him out of so many. ‘Oh, Finch,’ said Nick. ‘I was telling Matthew not to mind him.’ Matthew then. Matthew Osborne. Matthew Osborne. M.O. Mine Own, My Only, Miraculous One, Magical Object. Matthew. Of course it was Matthew, I knew that. What else could it have been? Ridiculous to have speculated on the possibility of any other name. Matthew. It had always been Matthew. ‘Anyway,’ Nick went on. ‘This is the Lower Buttery. We have to stay this side. Only fifth and sixth formers go behind that screen. See you, Fry,’ he threw over his shoulder, leading his brother through the crowd. Such progress so fast. Nick Osborne’s brother. Now. Regroup. Think. Think, man, think. What do we like about Nick Osborne? Not much. He’s clever. We concede that. But he’s sporty. Very, very, sporty. We

143 don’t like sportiness. What were his hobbies? How was I going to get him to be a friend? I could be as close to Nick as I liked, he was in the same year, besides he was not especially attractive, no one would talk. Hang on. How could they possibly be brothers? Nick was nearly as tall as me: he had to shave once a week. He was dark-haired, greasy haired. Not ugly, not ugly at all, but surely not of the same parentage? No, there was something, a look, a cast of expression, a slight downward dip of the head when it turned. They both had that. Nick’s eyes were blue too, but without any lapis lazuli depths. Just blue eyes. There was a German lesson that afternoon, I would make sure I sat next to Nick and start to cultivate him. Back at Fircroft after lunch I went to my study and sat alone to think about things. I was magnificently, triumphantly off games for at least a week with asthma: my doctor at home had come up trumps with an unequivocal note after a bad attack in late August just after my fourteenth birthday. I took a block from my desk and started to write down what I knew. He was Matthew. He was Matthew Osborne. He was at Redwood’s, like his brother. Matthew Osborne (R). I would find out his middle initials later. Osborne, M. J.? No, his brother was Osborne N. C. R., so Matthew would probably have two middle names as well. Osborne, M. P. A.? Matthew Peter Alexander, for example? It was possible. Osborne, M. St J. G.? Matthew St John George. That was just as possible. The most important thing to sort out was the why. Why did he do what he did to me? I wrote that down. And the what. What was it that he did to me? I wrote that down too. And the how. How did he do what he did for me? I started to write that down until I realised it was very nearly a song-lyric. Gerry and The Pacemakers? Freddie and The Dreamers? Something like that. Not very dignified. ‘How do you do what yah do for me... Banal. Won’t do, won’t do at all. I crossed it out. Crossed it all out, screwed up the paper, ripped it into tiny shreds and started again. In The Liar I compressed the whole thing jokily, like this. He had fallen in love with Hugo Alexander Timothy Cartwright the moment he laid eyes on him when, as one of a string of five new arrivals, the boy had trickled into evening hall the first night of Adrian’s second year. Heydon-Bayley nudged him. ‘What do you reckon, Healey? Lush or what?’ For once Adrian had remained silent. Something was terribly wrong. It had taken him two painful terms to identify the symptoms. He looked them up in all the major textbooks. There was no doubt about it. All the authorities concurred: Shakespeare, Tennyson, Ovid, Keats, Georgette Heyer, Milton, they were of one opinion. It was love. The Big One. Cartwright of the sapphire eyes and golden hair, Cartwright of the Limbs and Lips: he was Petrarch’s Laura, Milton’s Lycidas, Catullus’s Lesbia, Tennyson’s Hallam, Shakespeare’s fair boy and dark lady, the moon’s Endymion. Cartwright was Garbo’s salary, the National Gallery, he was cellophane: he was the tender trap, the blank unholy surprise of it all and the bright golden haze on the meadow: he was honey-honey, sugar-sugar, chirpy chirpy cheep-cheep and his baby-love: the voice of the turtle could be heard in the land, there were angels dining at the Ritz and a nightingale sang in Berkeley Square.

144 Adrian had managed to coax Cartwright into an amusing half-hour in the House lays two terms previously, but he had never doubted he could get the trousers down: that wasn’t it. He wanted something more from him than the few spasms of pleasure the limited activities of rubbing and licking and heaving and pushing could offer. He wasn’t sure what the thing was that he yearned for, but one thing he did know. It was less acceptable to love, to ache for eternal companionship, than it was to bounce and slurp and gasp behind the fives courts. Love was Adrian’s guilty secret, sex his public pride. All very well for me to write that nearly twenty years later, but even as I was writing it in the year 1990, seven years ago, I felt a twinge of guilt that I could be so cavalier, so casually sophisticated and so knowing about my former self and the acuteness of my feeling and the depth of my confusion. ‘It had taken him two painful terms’ — well, I suppose those seven words have the virtues of honesty and brevity. No pleonasm there. There is a hoary old chestnut in the film business. What is the most expensive stage direction you can write in the fewest number of words? So far as I know the winner, which was written into a genuine script, is still this: The fleets meet. ‘Two painful terms’ is probably my equivalent in the field of emotional budgeting. It took my mind, which is painfully slow when it comes to the acknowledgement of interior truths or to the achievement of any self-perception, a long time to realise what I sensed in an instant. I was in love. Very well. I could use that word. It had been translated and I understood it. All those dreary romantic plots made sense now. Those interminable screen looks between men and women shot in soft focus to the accompaniment of high strings, they had a meaning. That I could grasp. So I wrote it down that first afternoon. I love Matthew Osborne I instinctively knew this meant that everything was changed. It was not the same thing at all to write I love Matthew Osborne as it was to write I love Paris or I love pizza So I had to add Everything is different Even so, despite my knowing that ‘everything was different’ I did not realise that

145 everything — each thing that existed — was — truly, really, positively, actually was — different — not the same, other, ineradicably altered. After all, my timetable looked the same: still German at four and Maths at four-fifty, still CCF on Fridays, still Saturday compline and Sunday Qs. The study that Jo and I planned that evening to set about decorating, that looked the same. The quad outside appeared to be the same quad. The records on my shelf were the same records. I screwed the piece of paper up once more and stared out of the window. 5 I can’t remember, I honestly can’t remember if the events I am going to describe happened on the same day I laid eyes on Matthew Osborne. In my imagination it has become the same day, so that will have to do. I got up and left the study. I crossed through to the main part of the House and entered the changing room. There were pretty boys in Fircroft too. I went to the locker of the prettiest of them and opened it. The back of my hand just touched the jacket hanging inside and I heard the clink of money. I stole it. I stole it all, left the House, went down the music school and conducted my favourite Rossini piece as it had never been conducted before. Not William Tell, or The Barber of Seville, but the overture to The Thieving Magpie and do you know, never up to this very minute has the significance of that title struck me? I knew the piece so well that its individual words had stopped meaning anything. The Thieving Magpie. It seems so neat and organised and obvious as to resemble fiction, but it is God’s honest truth. Or the devil’s. Maybe that should have been the title for this book. The Thieving Magpie... or The Devil’s Honest Truth, for that matter ... I’ve slipped it on now, La Gazza Ladra as it calls itself in this compilation, and I am listening and jumping in my chair as I type this and I can see what I saw in it, and hear what I heard it in. For Rossini the sun always breaks out with such a joyful jerk that nothing, for a while, can ever seem bad, not even the stolen money in your pocket that chinks and clinks as you bring in the woodwinds and the brass section, thrashing like an epileptic in your hysterica passio, twitching with spastic arhythmic heaves and thrusts, not even the hard stone of new knowledge that was born in you that day that childhood is over and that something new has come into your being that may well unseat your reason for ever. This now became a pattern. I had always been Bad both publicly and privately. Bad in terms of ‘mobbing’ and ‘ragging’, showing off in front of the other boys, daring to go those extra few yards towards trouble and punishment, and Bad in the realms of secret wickedness. But now I didn’t care. I just did not care. My behaviour in the first year may have been judged to be purgatorial, now it became unequivocally infernal. Sometimes it made me popular, sometimes it made me loathed. In my first year I had tried to improve my judgement of the bounds of propriety that boys set in their tribally codified way. I became better at sensing when I was going too far and risking disfavour, better at riding the bucking bronco of popularity.

146 Sometimes the jokes worked well and I would rise above my generation in a bubble of fame and admiration. I think it fair to say that of all my intake in my first year I rapidly became the best known in the school. Not the most liked or the most admired, but the most recognisable and the most talked about. One great achievement was to be the Brewer affair which earned me many thumps on the back and chuckling congratulations. The Uppingham School Bookshop, where blocks and stationery were bought as well as textbooks, fiction, poetry and other more usual bookshop fare was run on behalf of the school by a rather fussy man called Mr Brewer. Most items were bought by use of the Order Form, a chit which one got one’s housemaster to sign after lunch to authorise the purchases, which would end up on the parental bill at the end of term. A typical order form might look something like this: UPPINGHAM SCHOOL ORDER FORM NAME…………….HOUSE………………. 6 blocks 1 bottle ink (blue-black) 1 bottle ink (green) 1 pencil sharpener Signature…………..Authorised…………….. The Signature field, as we would say in computer jargon today, was for oneself to sign, the Authorised field was for the housemaster’ s initials. ‘Green ink, Fry?’ ‘Well. sir, for English essays. I think it’s more stylish.’ ‘Oh Lord. Very well.’ Naturally, I was adept at Frowde’s hastily scribbled ‘G. C. F.’ and on the rare occasion when I could lay my thieving hands on a blank order form pad I would go mad with purchase. Something about Mr Brewer, however, some quality of fussiness and distrust, made one absolutely desperate to mob and bait the man to distraction. My first scheme was to persecute him by telephone. I had discovered, God knows how, that in those days of pulse telephony, before the introduction of the digital exchange and tone dialling, you could call a number by striking the receiver buttons in Morse code style, ten times for zero, nine times for nine and so on, a small gap left between each number. If you got the rhythm right you could tap out ‘350466’ in a public phone-box and get through without having to pay a single penny. Today’s phreaking and hacking make this look like child’s play, of course, but fun could be had with it. There was a red telephone kiosk in the market-place just opposite the High Street windows of the bookshop which meant we could call up Brewer and watch one of his assistants passing him the phone. ‘Is that Mr Brewer on the line?’ ‘Yes.’

147 ‘Well, you’d better get off, there's a train coming.’ A feeble start admittedly, but it got better. ‘Mr Brewer? This is Penguin Books here calling to confirm the order of four thousand copies of Lady Chatterley’s Lover.’ ‘What? No, no. It’s those boys! I never made the order. Cancel it! Cancel it!’ ‘I see. And the order for ten thousand of Last Exit to Brooklyn?’ Tee-hee. Or one could get elliptical and weird, which worked best when he picked up the phone himself. ‘Uppingham School Bookshop.’ ‘Yes?’ ‘Uppingham School Bookshop.’ ‘What do you want?’ ‘I beg your pardon?’ ‘How can we help?’ ‘This is the Uppingham School Bookshop here.’ ‘So you keep saying, but what do you want?’ ‘You made the call.’ ‘No I didn’t.’ ‘Well what number did you want?’ ‘I don’t want any number. I just want to get on with my life without being pestered by Uppingham School Bookshops, whatever they might be. Nuisance calls are against the law you know.’ ‘But you called me!’ ‘Look, if you don’t get off the line I shall call the police. The bishop is awaiting a very important call from one of his wives.’ ‘It’s a boy, isn’t it!’ ‘This particular one isn’t, no.’ ‘I can see you out of the window! I shall report you all.’ One day I was with Jo Wood in Boots the Chemists. I had been planning to buy a bottle of aniseed liquid to sprinkle on my trouser turn-ups to check out Jeeves’s theory that this would cause dogs to follow me (it didn’t work, incidentally, just made them yap and howl) and I noticed Brewer in another aisle. He hadn’t spotted me or Jo and an idea arose within me. ‘No, it’s so simple,’ I said, in a sudden, artificially low whisper, the kind that causes ears to prick up everywhere. ‘Brewer is so blind he never notices.’ Jo looked at me in his usual strained and constipated manner, but was sharp enough and familiar enough with my ways to realise that I must be up to something. I could tell from the sudden silence and stiffening in the neighbouring row that Brewer had frozen into a keen listening attitude. ‘You just go in with your duffle bag apparently full, a pair of old plimsolls on the top, go up to the book section and stuff as many books as you like in the bag. Put the plimsolls back on top, sling the bag over your shoulder, then go up and buy a pencil or something. Best when the shop’s really busy, during break, some time like that. He never, ever notices a thing. I’ve stolen literally hundreds of books that way. Come on, if you’re done here, let’s hit the buttery.’

148 I spread the word amongst a few friends and the next morning about seven of us entered the bookshop and oh-so-casually wandered up to the book section, which was on a raised level overlooking the rest of the shop. We all fell to our knees at different shelves, examined books, shot guilty glances over our shoulders and seemed to fumble about with our duffle bags, causing gym-shoes to fall out which had to be hastily replaced. Down the steps we went, duffle bags over shoulders, towards the girl at the cash desk. We proffered order forms for the acquisition of one block or one pencil (HB), swallowing nervously. Suddenly Brewer sprang up as if from nowhere. He had, rather pathetically, been hiding under the counter, which was enough to cause one of our number to give a premature scream of laughter that only a swift hack on the shins from me snuffed out. ‘Just a moment, gentlemen!’ said Brewer. Looks of startled innocence and amazement. ‘Yes, Mr Brewer?’ ‘All of you. Kindly empty your duffle bags on to the counter.’ ‘Really, Mr Brewer...’ ‘Do as I say!’ he rasped. ‘One at a time. Mr Fry first, I think. Yes. You first, Mr Fry.’ I shrugged resignedly and turned my duffel bag upside-down, grasping the sides so that only a pair of tattered black gym-shoes fell on to the surface of the counter. ‘Everything!’ said Brewer, a squeak of triumph entering his voice. ‘Everything?’ I repeated nervously. ‘Everything!’ ‘If you insist, Mr Brewer.’ ‘I do, Mr Fry!’ I shook and shook the duffle bag and out tumbled: • 6 very dirty jock-straps • About 70 loose mixed Jelly-tots, Bassett Mint Imperials, Liquorice All-Sorts and Trebor Refreshers • 12 broken Digestive biscuits • of Mr Lanchberry’s best Cream Slices (three days old) • 200 assorted fishing weights and air-pistol pellets • Pencil shavings • 1 leaking bottle of Vosene Medicated shampoo • 1 brand-new copy of Sons and Lovers (W. H. Smith’s receipt carefully tucked inside) • packet of Embassy Regal cigarettes and box of matches It was extremely hard not to fold up in a heap, but we managed to keep our faces straight and earnest. ‘Get those things off my counter!’ screamed Brewer, grabbing at Sons and Lovers, but already the other boys had started adding their own itemries, including condoms (which, with the artful addition of globs of Copydex and paste, presented the horrible appearance of having been very passionately used), a fish, rotting cheeses, a slippery heap of lambs’ kidneys and much, much more.

149 ‘Stop, stop!’ shrieked Brewer. ‘But Mr Brewer you said...’ ‘You did say, Mr Brewer!’ ‘We heard you. ‘Gosh, look at the time, everyone!’ I called in panic. ‘The bell’s about to go any minute. We’ll be back at lunchtime Mr Brewer, I’ll need the Lawrence book for an English lesson this afternoon. In the meantime do make free with anything you like the look of. I will want the jock-straps back eventually. You know, when you’ve done with them.’ And out we streamed, deaf to his protests. I was especially enjoying the possibilities of the one little ray of hope I had left him, the packet of Embassy and the matches. The Embassy pack was filled with slugs and the matchbox wriggled with a dozen spiders. This was all part of the thirteen-year-old innocence of my first year. Coupled with my acceptance within the House by boys like Rick Carmichael, Mart Swindells and Roger Eaton and my friendships with Richard Fawcett and Jo Wood life was good. My brother Roger did not have too much cause to blush for me yet. He was getting on with life in the benign way he had, with malice to none. Another older boy in our house who made me feel accepted was Paul Whittome, who simply exploded with paintings, drawings, surreal rock operas and poems, excellent at both the double bass and rugger. He found me amusing enough to include me in a band that he assembled with a saxophonist friend of his from Brooklands and Rick Carmichael, who played the piano superbly. We performed Jack Teagarden jazz standards, the Bonzo numbers ‘Hunting Tigers Out In India’ and ‘Jollity Farm’ and classics like ‘Rock Around the Clock’ and Hoagie Carmichael’s ‘Rocking Chair’. My party piece was to play the trumpet solo in ‘Rocking Chair’ with staggering physical passion and bulging Dizzie Gillespie cheeks. Meanwhile the curtain behind would accidentally rise to reveal that in fact the real trumpeter was a boy called Sam Rudder who stood there, barely moving, playing with completely serene calmness. Aside from that, I can’t remember what I actually did to justify my presence in the band, apart from a little incompetent hammering on the piano when Rick was playing the guitar or singing. I suppose I just arsed about entertainingly. We did well enough to be invited to perform at the public school in Oakham, six or seven miles away. When Paul Whittome left Uppingham he almost instantly made himself a millionaire, as he had promised Frowde he would. He started by selling vegetables in a stall off the A1 and rapidly became a King of Potatoes and Potato broking. He sold his spud business and now runs probably the most successful hotel restaurant in East Anglia. I go sailing with him and his wife sometimes and had the honour of being asked a few years ago to open a new set of guest-rooms for his inn, The Hoste Arms in Burnham Market. He would never forgive me for not giving you the name and address of his establishment for he is quite miraculously shameless and brazen when it comes to publicity. How else does a man get to be a millionaire at twenty-two? Besides, I owe it him for his kindness in believing in me enough to put me, musically talentless as I am, in a band. My other brush with showbusiness came when Richard Fawcett and I planned our sketches for the House Supper, Fircroft’s end of term Christmas party in which sixth- formers got to wear dinner jackets and drink wine, while the rest of us pulled crackers and mounted a mini-revue composed of music, songs and sketches.

150 Richard and I rewrote a Benny Hill skit in which a vicar is being interviewed unaware that his trouser flies are widely undone. Richard was the vicar (‘I like to throw open my portals to the public’), I was the interviewer, (‘I see your point, yes I do see your point.’). We rehearsed this endlessly and were astonished, as the curtain descended on our dress rehearsal, to hear Frowde, the housemaster, call out, ‘Trousers down, trousers down!’ We looked at each other, utterly baffled as to his meaning (as I still am). The curtain jerked up again and Frowde stood there, hands behind his back. ‘No, no. Trousers down,’ he repeated. ‘It’s either trousers up or trousers down. This kind of innuendo won’t do at all.’ So we had to go away and hastily assemble something else. Rick Carmichael and Martin Swindells had been censored too, so that night, at midnight in our dormitory there was seen a performance of Banned Material. Richard and I did our Vicar Sketch and Rick and Mart a dialogue playing with the St Crispin’s day speech from Shakespeare’s Henry V and its suggestive reference to those holding their manhoods, cheap. Richard Fawcett and I had by this time become so obsessed with comedy that we wrote to the BBC who had just started a new series called Open Door, the pioneer of that now depressingly common programming phenomenon ‘Access Television’. Open Door was designed to allow dyslexics, victims of injustice, support groups and others to air their grievances, but Richard and I had somewhat misinterpreted its aims and believed it to be a chance to Perform On Telly and Become Famous. In our letter to the BBC, we pompously elaborated our pitch. Comedy, we observed, with the arrival of Monty Python, had entered a modernist phase. Would it, like the other arts, disintegrate into modes of abstraction and conceptuality? How could a ‘new comedy’ be formulated? All that sort of thing. We planned to show the progress of comedy over the last twenty years and compare it with the progress of music, painting and literature. Would comedy disappear up its own self-referential arse, we wondered? Ridiculous, I know, but there you are. It was enough at least, to get us in interview in Lime Grove, Shepherd’s Bush. Nothing came of the meeting, but I still have the producer’s card. Mike Bolland went on to become senior programme commissioner for Channel when it started up; in those days he must have been one of the BBC’s most junior juniors, given the unfortunate job of weeding out the loonies who came knocking on the Open Door. I see him from time to time and I’m always far too embarrassed to remind him of those two public school boys babbling pretentiously about comedy and ideas. We must, I fear, return briefly to sex (as I write this, National Sex Awareness Week is coming to a close and its thrust, I believe, is to get Britain to talk about sex in order to dispel the guilt, misery and taboo surrounding the subject: I feel I’m doing my bit). It was towards the end of my first year that I was successfully seduced and deflowered. Now, I have never believed myself to be physically attractive. There are three reasons for this. 1. I’m not my type 2. I’m not physically attractive

151 3. So there None the less, in the eyes of some, I do know that I can give off a quality that comes close to sex appeal. I was never a prettyboy, or anything like (you have the pictures to hand that prove it) but being a late developer sexually I combined a mixture of knowingness, insolently suggestive sophistication and some kind of appetisingly unspoiled quality that could, on occasion, take the people’s fancy. A red-haired sixth-former and House Polly called Oliver Derwent called me to his study one day when I was on general fagging duties. ‘Close the door,’ he said. I obliged, wondering what I could possibly have done wrong this time. ‘Do you play cards?’ asked Derwent. ‘Er, yes. Yes. I suppose I do.’ The question took me completely by surprise. Maybe Derwent was starting up a House bridge club. Mine not to wonder why, however, mine but to stand patiently on the carpet and await instructions. ‘I’m just so bored,’ he said, languidly. ‘I thought I might find someone prepared to have a game or two of cards with me.’ It transpired that the only game Derwent knew how to play was a game called Strip Poker, so strip poker was the game we played. ‘Better lock the door,’ said Derwent. ‘Right-o,’ I said. Now, you might well be thinking: Hello! If this Derwent could play strip poker, then he could play ordinary poker. This never crossed my mind. One just didn’t question senior boys. They knew. So the pair of us knelt on the carpet and Derwent dealt. Within a very short time I was completely naked and Derwent was in nothing but his underpants. My legs were drawn coyly up to conceal what little there was to conceal and I was starting to feel a touch embarrassed. ‘Fry,’ said Derwent, blushing with that ferocity peculiar to redheads, ‘may I feel your body?’ Those are the exact words he used. ‘May I feel your body?’ Rather sweet really. ‘Er... okay,’ I said. So he felt my body. I became excited, in the way that I had been excited at Stouts Hill with Halford and the others. I could see from the prodding in his underpants that he, too, was excited. He then began a long, complicated speech about the frustration he felt at the lack of girls at Uppingham and how, in my smoothness, I was actually rather like a girl. Perhaps I wouldn’t mind if he made love to me? I had simply no idea what that phrase meant, but it sounded charming and I said that it sounded like a reasonable idea. At this point there came a knock on the door. ‘Derwent!’ ‘Just a minute!’ I leapt to my feet and started to scrabble frantically with my clothes. The door handle rattled. ‘Ho! Wanking!’ said a voice.





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




152 Derwent leaned forward and cupped his hand around one of my ears. ‘Out the window!’ he breathed hotly. ‘I’ll see you in the House Rears in ten minutes. I nodded, slightly frightened by this time, and not so sure that I wanted to go through with this making love business, but I climbed out of the window and dived into a nearby bush. Dressed again, teeth chattering, I made my way to the House Rears, a set of disused Victorian lavatories round the back of the House. When Derwent arrived eight minutes later I regret to say he had come prepared with a tub of Vaseline and a grim determination to see things through. I remember very little about the experience. I remember being bent forward and I remember grasping my own ankles. I remember some pain, plenty of grunting from Derwent and a sliding, slippy wetness running down the inside of my thighs when I stood up. Derwent was gone by the time I had pulled up my trousers and turned round, and whenever we saw each other in the House it was as strangers, no mention made, no extra friendliness shown or expected. Just a blankness. I would love to be able to tell you that this Oliver Derwent is now our Ambassador in Washington or the Chairman of ICI, but I have no idea what he’s up to or where he is. Last I heard he had children, and was working in one of the Gulf States. I bear him no grudge and cannot believe he did me any harm. He didn’t make me queer, he didn’t make me a bugger or a buggeree, so all’s jake as far as I’m concerned. Besides, all that was BMO, Before Matthew Osborne, and events BMO were rendered meaningless by everything AMO. AMO, as I said, I went loopy. Everything I did publicly and privately became more extreme. Publicly, the jokes and the wildness intensified, privately the stealing became more and more regular. At this time, the only salvation and sense in my life came from reading. It was then that I started on Douglas, Firbank and Forster. It was then that I discovered the novels and autobiographies that reflected my own emotional turmoil and my own circumstances, sometimes so exactly that I alternated between a triumphant feeling of being vindicated and endorsed by the Masters and a deflated sense of being nothing more than a living cliché: The Flannelled Fool, by T. C. Worsley; A Separate Peace, by John Knowles; Sandel by Angus Stewart; Lord Dismiss Us, by Michael Campbell; Escape from the Shadows by Robin Maugham; Autobiography of an Englishman by ‘Y’; The World, The Flesh and Myself by Michael Davidson (with its famous opening line: ‘This is the life- history of a lover of boys.’); The Fourth of June by David Benedictus; Special Friendships by Roger Peyrefitte, and many, many others, which in turn guided me towards the notorious Book Twelve of the Greek Anthology; The Quest For Corvo by A. J. A. Symons (the unexpurgated edition complete with Baron Corvo’s infamous Venice Letters); the novels of Simon Raven (happily still then being produced in profusion); the works of Jean Genet, Oscar Wilde, Edward Carpenter and the Uranian school, the paintings of Eakins and Tuke, and that wonderful, syrupy slew of pre- and post-First World War sentimental school love stories like The Hill, David Blaize, Jeremy at Crale and Alec Waugh’s The Loom of Youth. So, stolen money in my pocket and nothing but Matthew on my mind, that is how I would spend my afternoons, either in the library or howling to Rossini and Beethoven. The Lower Buttery was perched halfway between the steps that led down from the

153 Magic Carpet to the Music School, so I would leave the record library and climb up, as other boys were coming down, their hair still wet from showers, their faces pink from exercise, and I would avoid their eyes as I went in. My eyes were only for Mrs Lanchberry as she broke more eggs into her vat of boiling lard, money stolen from the pretty and the athletic clutched in my hands, and of course my eyes were for Matthew in case he might come in too. But I had discovered a terrible truth about Matthew. He was healthy. He was Good at games. In fact, he was brilliant at games. He was going to be a star. We hadn’t seen nothing yet, apparently. You think he’s a fine hockey player? You wait till you see him on the cricket field in the summer term. You just wait, his brother said. We already had a cricket hero at Uppingham, in the shape of Jonathan Agnew, who went on to play for Leicestershire and England and as Aggers now comments wittily and (thus far) without ego and derision for the BBC’s Test Match Special. Whether the stealing in earnest really did start the day I first saw Matthew Osborne I cannot, as I say, be sure, but they are connected. Falling in love is not an excuse because, as I have shown you before, this was by no means the first time I had stolen. But now it gripped me like a demon. It became an addiction, a necessity and, perhaps, a revenge. A revenge against beauty, order, healthiness, seemliness, normality, convention and love. To say that I was the victim of these crimes, that I was punishing myself, that is hardly fair. There must have been dozens and dozens of boys whose lives were temporarily screwed and savaged by the sudden disappearance of their money. It’s hard for even the most Christian and temperate soul not to be enraged by theft. And that old complaint about the sense of violation, of invasion, of tainting that is felt by the victims of theft: maybe that is part of what I was doing — leaving a foul kind of urine trail, an anti-social territorial marking, or unmarking, wherever I went, wrestling with Hassan’s Anti-Hero’s ‘problems of estrangement and communion, sincerity and simulation, ambition and acquiescence.’ Yeah, yeah, yeah — you were a thieving little tosser, we get the picture, we will draw the conclusions, thank you. My behaviour too, as I said, my general social behaviour, that went to hell in a handcart. Poor old Ronnie Rutter who taught me French. He had joined the school aged seventeen, just after the First World War and was so gentle, so pliable, so plain sweet that he had never even been made a housemaster. Temporarily he had taken charge of Meadhurst for a term during the Second World War, that was the greatest career height he had ever scaled. I used to mob him up, as the school slang had it, so thoroughly, so completely, so humiliatingly that I blush cardinal red at the memory of such cardinal sin. I once stood on top of my desk, took out a gat gun (one of those air pistols that fires pellets but looks to the uninitiated to be a deadly automatic weapon) and shouted in a hysterical Cody Jarrett voice, ‘I’ve had it. Had it, I tell you! Just one move, and you’re dead. You’re all dead.’ Everybody pissed themselves and Ronnie did the best he could. ‘Put it down, there’s a good fellow, we’ve so much to get through this period.’ I made up a letter once that purported to come from a female ‘pen-friend’ in France

154 and filled it with every dirty, disgusting sexual French word I knew or could find out. I approached him at the end of a lesson and asked if he could help me with it, as I found some of the vocabulary rather difficult. ‘I’m so pleased to hear you have a French pen-friend, Fry,’ said Ronnie. And he proceeded to translate the letter for me, replacing the obscenities with innocent little phrases of his own as he went, pretending for all the world that it was the most ordinary communication in the world. ‘I would like to suck your big fat cock’ became, ‘I look forward so much to visiting your country’ and ‘Lick my wet pussy till I squirt’ emerged as, ‘There are so many interesting things to do and see in Avignon’ and so on throughout the letter. The word he used in his school report to my parents at the end of term was, I think, ‘exuberant’. ‘Sometimes a little more exuberant than is good for him.’ None of that ‘bad influence’, ‘rotten apple’, ‘thinks he’s so clever’ stuff the others off-loaded. He invited me to tea with his wife. It brings a lump to my throat to think of such absolute sweetness of nature, such tenderness. He hadn’t given up, either. We used to say sometimes, in our sneering way of schoolmasters, that after more than ten years they had turned into cynical time-servers or unworldly eccentrics. Ronnie was neither cynic nor sentimentalist, and he put all of himself into every lesson. Utterly ineffectual as a disciplinarian maybe, but I cannot think of a life that was less of a failure. There’s a passage in Portnoy’s Complaint (which I had read greedily and joyfully, loving the daring of those jerk-off scenes in the bathroom): ... society not only sanctions gross and unfair relations among men, but encourages them ... Rivalry, competition, envy, jealousy, all that is malignant in human character is nourished by the system. Possessions, money, property — on such corrupt standards as these do you people measure happiness and success. Scarcely fresh news I suppose, but then the Gospels aren’t either, yet they too contain ideas that bear repetition. Only a fool dismisses an idea because it has been heard before. ‘Man will become better when you show him what he is like,’ Chekhov thought. Maybe Ronnie tried to show me what I was like. He did so more effectively than many masters who tried to tell me what I was like, which is not the same thing at all. I used in the end to feel a kind of sickness, a feeling of nauseous surfeit after a Ronnie Rutter French lesson, a sickness that I soon identified as self-disgust. After a while I gave up and became sanctimoniously fierce in my refusal to allow others to mob him up. Anybody else was fair game, but Ronnie was exempt. Maybe Ronnie saw, that was the other thing. Maybe it was written all over me, this agony of love that I was enduring. We’re in the second term of the year now. I’ve got to know Matthew a little better, partly by getting to know Nick better, partly by following the promptings of unrequited love, which train you exquisitely well in the art of accidental meetings. When you love you plan your day entirely according to the movements of your loved one. I knew Matthew’s timetable by heart. I knew the places he was likely to visit. I knew the matches he played in — he was already in the Colts First XI — I knew the clubs and societies he had joined and I joined them too. I knew what sort of music he liked, when he was likely to be visiting the Thing Centre and when he was likely to be in his House.

155 And every day he grew more and more beautiful. He was still climbing the gentle slope to his peak of perfection. He never succumbed to acne, greasy hair or gawkiness. Every day he grew and grew in grace towards the completion of his beauty. I was subtle, Christ Jesus, was I subtle. He could never have imagined for ten seconds that I had any interest in him at all, not from the accident of our endless meetings, nor from the coincidence of our mutual interests. I never looked unpleased to see him, but neither did I show any pleasure. I took a kindly interest and... I entertained. For the joy of it was... He found me funny and, like Elizabeth Bennett, Matthew was one who dearly loved a laugh. He was talented. He played the piano like an angel, his athleticism was outstanding and he was academically competent. I don’t remember what degree he later took at Cambridge, but it was either a First or a 2: 1 as well as an inevitable triple haul of sporting Blues. Verbally however, he was ordinary. He had no rhetoric, no style, no wit nor any easy companionship with words. Since I seemed to him to have all these things, he looked on me as extraordinary and would roll and roll about with laughter whenever I wanted him to, which was often, a kitten on the end of my verbal balls of wool. Never too far... I learned early on that like a kitten he could suddenly bore of a game, suddenly appear to think it all rather facile and beneath his dignity. Often then, just when I sensed that moment might come, I would stop the joking at its still pleasurable height, shake my head and express some deep thought of frustration, anger at the political injustices and criminal stupidity of ‘this place’ as the school was mutteringly called by all. Once, I remember, I was in the Thring Centre, typing out the whole of a P. C. Wodehouse novel on one of the big IBM electric typewriters. Frozen Assets, the book was, I recall. I did this sort of thing a great deal, I adored the feel of typing, watching the keys leap and smack the paper, making words appear with such clean magical clarity; I loved too the way I could monitor my noticeable improvement in accuracy and speed and God how I gloried in the admiration when boys clustered around gasping in amazement at the rapidity with which my fingers could fly over the keys without my even looking down. Today’s qwerty generation would think me abominably slow, of course, but in those days typing proficiency was a most eccentric and enviable attainment. I was alone however in the typing and Gestetner room, that February evening, just clacking away at the keyboard. I didn’t hear him come in, but a fraction of a second before he cleared his throat to speak I felt a presence in the room, a presence that I later convinced myself I had known was his even before I heard his voice. ‘What are you doing?’ A great surge went through me that tingled my cheeks (still does, you know, to remember it) as I heard that voice. Something else there was too. Something that alerted me to the possibility that all was not well with him. ‘That you, Matteo?’

156 I called him Matteo: it was my nickname for him. I scorned the ‘Ozzie Two’ that had become ‘Ozziter’ as far as the rest of the school was concerned. To be given a private nickname, even if it is carelessly, almost disdainfully given, is a massive compliment; successful nicknaming is an absolutely essential weapon in the armoury of any romantic seducer. I had discovered that his middle initial (unlike his brother he turned out to have just the one) was A for Anthony, which made him M. A. O. I had experimented with the idea of calling him the Chairman, as in Mao, but that seemed obvious. Then it struck me that Matt. A. O. sounded like the Italian for Matthew, so Matteo it was, from me and me alone. I once walked on air for a week when I overheard him ticking off a contemporary, Madeley-Orne, who had dared to call him that. ‘Matteo is not my name,’ he had said hotly. ‘I’ve heard Fry call you that.’ ‘Yes, well Fry calls everybody weird things, but that doesn’t give you the right. He calls you Makes-Me-Yawn, if it comes to that.’ The real reason I came on Monday evenings to the Thing Centre was because I knew that Monday was Matthew’s pottery day. This was one activity 1 had not tried to join him in, since I had queered my pitch with the pottery department my very first term by contriving to burn out the motor that drove one of the throwing wheels and then, the very next week, breaking one of the pug-mill dyes. A pug-mill, in case you haven’t been introduced, is a sort of potter’s mince-making machine. You shove all the spare off cuts of slip and old clay into a hopper at the top, squeeze them down with a lever and pure, consistent clay comes out the other end, either in one great thick sausage, or — if you fix a template or dye over the exit hole — in smaller little wriggly snakes that can be used to make those coil-ware mugs, vases and pots that are still produced in woundingly huge quantities to this day, much to the distress and embarrassment of all. Fearing that during the third week I might do even more damage I was pronounced persona non grata by the staff, the pot-it-buro, as I liked to call them, and so filled my Mondays, while Matthew was there, in the Thring Centre too, by typing or playing with the gerbils that scuttled about in transparent perspex conduits and pipes all round the building, citizens of their own Fritz Lang Rodent Metropolis. The system was designed — like almost everything else in Uppingham from the theatre up the road that was even now rising from the skeleton of the old Victorian gymnasium, to the chairs and light fixtures of the Thring Centre — by the remarkable master in charge, Chris Richardson, who is today supremo of the Pleasance Theatre, the organisation which seems ever more to dominate the Edinburgh Festival Fringe and which now has permanent habitation in London too. Richardson was known, for no reason I can tell, as Trog — perhaps because his Hogarthian features resembled the work of the Punch cartoonist Trog. He carried the smell of pipe tobacco about with him and tolerated my arsiness, frivolity and absolute incompetence and lack of common sense in those fields of endeavour which came so naturally to him, draughtsmanship, planning and construction, because ‘at least I made use of the bloody place’ even if my idea of making use of such a ‘resource’, as it would be called today, was pointlessly to tip-tap away like a temp in a typing-pool. So there I am, doing just that, and I hear behind me the voice that is my reason for being. ‘That you, Matteo?’ As if I didn’t know. And said as if I didn’t really care too much, so absorbed was I in my Important Typing.

157 ‘Mm... You writing something?’ ‘No just typing practice really. Bored of the potting-shed?’ ‘Got something in the kiln.’ ‘So... just kiln time then, are you?’ ‘Tsserh!’ That is really the best way I can render his polite giggle at my dreadful pun. I swung round in my seat to look at him. I was right. He was in distress. I suppose I had sensed it because the way he had asked ‘What are you doing?’ had set up some chime in me, had reminded me of the way I would ask my mother precisely the same question when I knew perfectly well what she was doing but wanted her to stop because I had a grievance to air. ‘You all right, old crocus?’ P. G. Wodehouse was seeping deep into my language. ‘Oh it’s nothing...’ There was a fierce disconsolacy in his expression. I have described him to you as beautiful, which is a senseless description, a space that you will have to fill for yourself with your own picture of beauty; also I have told you he was below the average in height. There was a hint, no more than that, of stockiness about him, a solidity that prevented, despite such overwhelming beauty of countenance and body, any suggestion of the porcelain, any pretty delicacy that might desex and sanitise. It was enough to turn sensuousness into sensuality, but not enough to detract from his liquid grace. It was even more marked, this grounded solidity now, I noticed, as he defiantly attempted not to look unhappy. ‘How long have you got to wait before the dinner’s-ready bell goes in your oven?’ I asked. ‘Oh, about forty minutes. Why?.’ ‘Let’s go for a walk then. All this typing is no good for my back.’ ‘Okay.’ He waited while I squared the typed sheets, switched off the typewriter, threw on its silvery dust cover and perched a scribbled note next to it: ‘Leave alone or die bloodily.’ This was the era when military greatcoats were the innest thing to wear. I had a WW2 American Air Force coat that was the envy of the world, Matthew an RAF equivalent: he had also, perhaps on account of his older brother, managed to get one of the old school scarves, striped in knitted wool like a Roy of the Rovers football scarf, unlike the scratchy new college-style black and red that I wore. With his wrapped warmly about his neck he looked so divine and vulnerable I wanted to scream. It was a cold night and just beginning to snow. ‘Yippee, no games tomorrow by the looks of it,’ I said. ‘You really hate sport, don’t you?’ said Matthew, vapour steaming from the hot mystery of his mouth and throat. ‘I don’t mind watching it, but “Is this the man who has lost his soul?”’ I misquoted: ‘The flannelled fool at the wicket and the muddied oaf at the goal.’ I had just read Cuthbert Worsley’s autobiography and it had sent me into quite a spin. ‘Is that what you think of me as then? A muddy oaf?’ ‘I wouldn’t have said so,’ I said, a little surprised. ‘I mean, I don’t mean to be rude, but I’m not sure I think of you as anything, really.’ ‘Oh.’ We walked on in silence, while I tried to work out where this was leading.

158 ‘You don’t ...‘ he blurted in some confusion,’... you don’t like me then?’ ‘Well of course I like you, you daft onion. I’m not in the habit of going for walks with people I dislike.’ ‘In spite of the fact that I’m a flannelled fool and a muddy oaf?’ ‘I’ll let you into a secret, Matteo. The reason I hate games so much, and don’t you dare tell anyone this, is simple... I’m no bloody good at them.’ ‘Oh,’ he said again. Then. ‘Why do you like me then?’ ‘Christ, Osborne,’ I said, getting a bit senior in my panic at the direction all this seemed to be going in, ‘I like most people. You seem harmless. You’re polite and most importantly of all, you laugh at my bloody jokes. You fishing for compliments here or what?’ ‘No, no. I’m sorry. It’s just that. Well. It was something someone said to me.’ Oh fuck here we go, I thought. His brother has been warning him off. Some jealous son of a bitch has been whispering. The game is up. ‘Who said what to you?’ I asked, trying to smother the swallowing nervousness I felt. ‘It doesn’t really matter who it was. Just someone m my House. I was sweeping the corridor, you know, and he started.., he started trying stuff.’ ‘He made an advance you mean?’ I said. Advance? Well what other word could I have used? Matthew nodded, looked away and out it all came in a hot, indignant tumble. ‘I told him to leave me alone and he called me a tart. He said that everyone could see the way I played up to certain pollies and to people like Fry who I was always hanging around with. He said I was a prettyboy pricktease.’ In my head, even as I winced at hearing such words from him, I rapidly ran through a list of possible names that might fit the picture of this bungling, asinine, spiteful brute from Redwood’s and at the same time just as rapidly selecting, from a whole suite of possible reactions, the right stance for me to take on this choked and miserable confession: outrage, indignity, tired man-of-the-world cynicism, fatherly admonition, comradely sympathy ... I considered them all and settled on a kind of mixture. I shuddered, half at the cold, half at the horror of it all. ‘This place!’ I said. ‘This fucking place... thing is, Matteo, it’s a hothouse. You wouldn’t think so with the snow falling all around us, but it is. We live under glass. Distorting glass. Everything is rumour, counter-rumour, guesswork, gossip, envy, interference, frustration, all that. The secret of survival in a place like this is to be simple.’ ‘Simple?’ It was hard to tell whether the clear swollen globes of moisture that glistened at the end of his lashes were melted snowflakes or tears. ‘In a way simple. Rely on friendship.’ ‘Yes, but...’ ‘If you’ve got a good friend, you’ve never really got any reason to worry. You’ve always got someone to talk to, someone who’ll understand you.’ ‘Like you and Woody, you mean?’ It wasn’t what I meant, of course. It was far from what I meant. ‘Yes. Like me and Woody,’ I said. ‘I could tell Jo anything and I know he’d see it in its right proportion. That’s the trick in a place like this, proportion. Who would you say is your best friend?’ He shrugged his shoulders. ‘Don’t know,’ he said, almost sulkily. ‘You see, thing is, I

159 know, because my brother told me...’ ‘Know what?’ ‘You know, that I’m... you know, pretty.’ He got rid of the word as if its presence had been souring his mouth like a bad olive. Pretty! God I hated that word. Pretty boy, pretty boy ... only a lumpen, half -witted heterosexual would think Matthew pretty. He was beautiful, like the feet of the Lord on the hills, he was beautiful. Like the river, like the snow that was falling now more thickly than ever, like nothing on earth, like everything on earth he was beautiful. And some roaring hairy-pizzled Minotaur had dared to grab at him and call him a prettyboy pricktease. Even his own brother had used that word. ‘Pretty?’ I said, as if the idea had never struck me before. ‘Well you’re exceptionally good-looking, I suppose. You’ve got regular features, unlike me with my big bent nose and my arms ten foot long. But pretty isn’t a word I would have used. Morgan is pretty, I would say.’ Morgan was a Fircroft new boy, on whom many eyes had fallen. ‘Thomas Morgan?’ said Matthew in surprise. ‘Oh.’ Was there just a touch here, the merest hint of wounded vanity in his reaction or was that my imagination? ‘If you go in for that sort of thing, that is,’ I added hastily. ‘Personally, as I say, friendship is my credo.’ He nodded dumbly and I took a chance. ‘Look,’ I said, and I put my arm round his shoulders and squeezed. ‘That’s what friends do in a natural world. It’s affection and support in a universe where we all need affection and support. But in this place it’s “queering” and it makes people point and sneer. You and I know it’s friendship, but when someone like that vile cunt in your House tries it on with you, he kids himself that it’s your fault. Always remember that he’s the one who’s scared. He may insult you but secretly he’s terrified that you’re going to tell your brother or your housemaster or the whole House. That’s why he’s trying to kid himself that you led him on. It’s the old, old story. Just like Potiphar’s wife and just like every rejected rapist the world over. But don’t let what your brother said worry you. He meant well but he’s obviously made you doubt everyone’s motives towards you. Those millionaires who are convinced that people only like them for their money, you know the type? Well, you don’t want to become the equivalent, do you? Someone who only believes that people like you because you’re good-looking. You wouldn’t want to live like that. That’s nothing but the lack of confidence trick.’ He had allowed my arm to stay around him without protest. It was dark. No one could see us. It was the finest achievement of my life so far, arrived at with bluff, deceit, hypocrisy, manipulation, abuse of trust and a few exploitative elements of gimcrack wisdom and genuinely good advice. Good advice, like a secret, is easier to give away than to keep. I let my arm drop and returned it to the warm interior of my greatcoat pocket. ‘Do you think you’re pretty?’ I asked. He shook his head. ‘Well there you are then. You can’t live your life in the shadow of other people’s opinions, can you? As I say, keep it simple.’ ‘Thanks, Fry,’ he said. ‘I wish I knew how you know all these things.’

160 ‘Hey, come on. You’re only in the second term of your first year. You’re thirteen years old. You’re not expected to know the secrets of the universe.’ ‘I’m fourteen actually,’ he said. ‘It was my birthday last week.’ Jesus, he was only ... what, six months younger than me? ‘Well, fourteen, then. Still, you can't...’ ‘The same age as you. But you just seem to know everything.’ The bass-line to the badly produced dance-track of my life. ‘How come you know everything, Fry?’ I want to reply, ‘How come you think I know everything? Or, how come you think I think I know everything? How come that?’ Well, I must be honest, I do have some idea how people might believe it. Take for example the selection of photographs to accompany this book. What a job. To find a single photograph of me in which I don’t look like a smug, self -satisfied creep who has just swallowed a quart of cream and knows where he can get his complacent paws on another. That photograph of me, standing next to my brother dressed for his first day at Chesham Prep, my smugness there qualifies for swagger, pride in him at least. You should see the photographs I had to discard. Every time I pose for a photograph I try and smile a friendly smile, a sort of ‘Hello there! Gosh! Crumbs! Isn’t this jolly!’ sort of smile. Every time the photograph comes out I see a silken smirk on my face that makes me want to wail and shriek. Vanity of course, as the preacher saith, all is vanity. Maybe I should have let you see my graduation photograph and a few other pictures that would have sent you doubled-up to the vomitorium. So that look, that oh-so-pleased-with-himself look, combined with a lamentable propensity to explode with unusual words, to spout like a thesaurus and to bristle with look-at-me-aren’t-I-clever general knowledge ... I’d be the fool of the world if I didn’t see how that might give others the impression that I thought I knew all the answers. But then you see, I am the fool of the world. Matthew was no exception to the general view of me. He looked up to me, physically because I was a foot taller and intellectually because he sincerely believed that I had access to wisdom and knowledge that were denied him. I did a lot of reading, and I had a good memory, everyone knew that of me. He thought that this knowledge gave me power, even when he knew, as everyone knew, that I was always getting into trouble, getting into more and more trouble all the time: he couldn’t have known that so much of that was on account of him or that I was on the verge of getting into the most serious trouble of my life so far that very week. Still this persists. Enough people know by now what a mess my life has always been, yet they continue to believe either that ‘It’s all right for you, Stephen, you’ve got it sorted’ or that I think it’s all right for me and that I think I’ve got it sorted, neither of which — however many times I scream it and however many times history and circumstance prove it — is true. This whole thread somehow started with my speculating about the gentle kindness of Ronnie Rutter and wondering whether maybe he saw. Perhaps it was written all over me, this agony of love, I wondered. That has been the big cleft stick of my life. It was around this time that I started punstering like a maniac, mostly dreadful nonsense, but I do remember being struck by

161 discovering the happy accident of this: Compromise is a stalling between two fools. It’s sort of too neat and too perfect (perfect in the wrong way) to be amusing or even interesting, just another example of the weirdnesses thrown up by our extraordinary language, but the two stools that I fell between, and daily fall between still, are best described as being defined by the circumstance that I was and am both transparent and opaque, illegible and an open book. Sometimes I wonder what is the point of all my dissembling and simulation if so many friends, acquaintances, enemies (if I have any) and perfect strangers are able to see through my every motive, thought and feeling. Then I wonder what is the point of all my frankness, sharing of experience and emotional candour if people continue to misinterpret me to such an extent that they believe me balanced, sorted, rationally in charge, master of my fate and captain of my soul. My guess is that the instinct of Ronnie Rutter was that I was an ‘unhappy boy’ and that he was too scrupulously well mannered or too trusting in the benevolence of time and fate as to enquire into the whys and wherefores. Matthew, the source of all my misery and all my joy, all my feeling and all my inability to feel, was completely blind to my absolute need for him, too lacking in imagination to be able to see that my happiness was entirely contingent upon him, and I blamed him for that without being able to see that I was trapped in a hole that I had dug. How could he possibly have known? How could he possibly have guessed? Until someone has loved they cannot possibly know what it might be like to be loved. Such then was the spin of my madness. I expected the illegible and the deeply buried in me to be read as if carved on my forehead, just as I expected the obvious and the ill- concealed to be hidden from view. When I wrote the phrase, many pages back now, ‘unrequited love’ I giggled to myself, for at the first go I committed the Freudian keyslip of typing unrequired love. It is, I know, for I have experienced it perhaps twice in my life, an awful privilege to be too much loved and perhaps the kindest thing I ever did in my life was never to let Matthew know to what degree he had destroyed my peace and my happiness. He, after all, was to prove brave enough.., but that is jumping the gun. The real Matthew Osborne is reading this now and laughing. Maybe he is groaning. Maybe he is writhing in embarrassment. It might fall out that one day in the future he will say to his wife or his children (for he is a family man now) that if they happen upon Moab is my Washpot in a library or second-hand bookshop they might be interested to know that he is Matteo. If they do read this book they will look at his grey, thinning hairs and his paunch and his faded blue eyes and they will giggle and shake their heads. We walked back to the Thing Centre, Matthew thinking — what? Pondering my advice on friendship, ruing the snow that might cancel tomorrow’s match, hoping that his vase hadn’t cracked in the kiln, I could not guess. I walked by his side, everything inside me crying out to make this speech: ‘Come on, let’s just turn on our heels and leave this place. What does it hold for you? There’s nothing here for me. We’ll walk along the road to the end of town and, in the end, someone will give us a lift to London. We will survive there. Whom else do we need but

162 each other? Me with my quick wits, you with your quick body. We could find work doing something. Painting, decorating, stacking shelves. Enough to buy a flat. I would write poetry in my spare time and you would make pots and play the piano in bars. In the evenings we could lie by each other’s side on a sofa and just be. I would stroke your hair with my fingers, and maybe our lips would touch in a kiss. Why not? Why not?’ Instead, we made the rather awkward farewells of those who have just exchanged intimacies —exchanged? I had taken, he had given — and he returned to the pottery shop. With no stomach left for the keyboard I trudged my way back through the snow to Fircroft. I had a horrible feeling if I went to my study I might open my heart out to Jo Wood, so I decided to seek out Ben Rudder, the House-captain and ask his permission to have an early bath and go to bed with a book. I needed to clear it with him so that I could be absent from evening call-over. Rudder could be a stickler: strange to think that such an efficient public school authoritarian should go to Cambridge, get a degree, then a doctorate in zoology, and suddenly transform himself into a committed and far left socialist, ending up as editor of Frontline, the newspaper of the Workers’ Revolutionary Party. Strange, but true. I’ve lost touch however, so maybe now he’s changed again. I hope so, not because I disapprove of the WRP, but because people who can change and change again are so much more reliable and happier than those who can’t. Rudder consented to my request and I went upstairs. That’s when it happened. Everyone has their own story. With some it’s a deliberate and concerted attempt to get things moving, with others it might be the result of a friend’s assistance. A common one is sliding down a rope, I believe. With me it was the old cliché of soap in the bath. Well, it gave me the shock of my life, I can tell you. I’ve described the slight revulsion of watching that boy’s penis at Stouts Hill suddenly sick up with semen, so I was prepared for the appearance of the stuff itself qua stuff; what I had no inkling of was the physical sensation. I don’t suppose anyone will be able to forget the head-swimming power of their first orgasm. Still, you don’t want to hear any more on that subject. We’ve all been there, unless we’re female in which case we’ve been somewhere else, but I dare say it amounts to more or less the same thing, but in different colourways. I am certain, certain as I can be, that this breakthrough of mine was a mechanical response to idle lathering and nothing to do with Matthew and my having had my arm round him. At least I think I am certain. Once I realised, at any rate, that I was not going to swoon into a dead faint or see hairs sprouting from the palms of my hands, I tidied things up and went to bed feeling rather pleased with myself. A good day. 6 The next day was a bad day. They really don’t come much worse. Like all bad days it started well and full of promise. The world was wedding-cake white, there would be no games. What is more I had no PE on Tuesdays, so it looked like a day of gentle trotting about from lesson to lesson, followed perhaps by a nice fat pigout at the Lower Buttery. For which, it goes without saying, money would be required. My Post Office account book showed that I had five new pence in credit, not enough even in those far-off days for

163 much more than a slice of bread, a glass of water and a Trebor Refresher. I had recently happened upon a new source of money however: Matron’s handbag. After lunch, Matron had coffee with the Frowdes and their guests, and this, I discovered, provided me with a marvellous opportunity to sneak into her flat, which was just off an upstairs corridor, dive into her handbag and snaffle what could be snaffled. So that lunchtime I was back at the House, after a morning’s Latin, English and horrid, horrid Maths, looking forward to the joys of a splendid afternoon. How was I to find out what Matthew might be doing? That was the only question that really concerned me. His match would be cancelled. There was talk of tobogganing down the slope that ran down from the Middle — Redwood’s was the nearest House to that area, maybe I would take the path a long way round and see if Matthew was to be found there. I was still high on my breakthrough in the bath too. For a moment I had wondered if maybe I wasn’t whole. There is some absurd steroid that floats about inside the male and makes him feel ten foot tall just because he’s been able to come. It is founded no doubt on the soundest evolutionary principles, but it is ridiculous none the less. Since I was already close to being ten foot tall without the help of the steroid anyway, its effect may have been weaker on me than on many others, but there was still a great spring in my stride as I climbed the stairs after lunch and headed for Matron’s flat. I should have known better, it was a Tuesday in February. Many of my life’s most awful moments have taken place on Tuesdays, and what is February if not the Tuesday of the year? I walked casually up and down the corridor a few times to make certain that it was as deserted as usual and then opened the door and went down the little passageway that led to her flat. There, on her bed was the handbag. I opened it, reached for the purse and then, with terrible swift suddenness, a cupboard swung open and Matron stepped out. There was nothing I could do or say. ‘Sorry’ I think was the only word I managed. I said it perhaps a dozen times, rising in trembling tones. ‘Go to your tish and wait there.’ It seems Matron had noticed the continual disappearance of money and had worked out when it was going. She had set a trap and I had walked straight into it. There was no possibility of escape nor any suggestion of an excuse. It was plain that I was the Thief. No hand was ever caught redder, no cash register drawer ever slammed shut on more palpably guilty fingers. By this time Fircroft knew there was a House Thief and most people guessed it was me, which is why, I suppose, I had diverted my attention away from the House changing rooms and confined my thieving to Matron’s handbag or the Sports Hall and swimming- pool changing rooms down in the school. Rudder the Captain of House himself came to escort me down to Frowde’s office. The dear man was simultaneously distraught and furious. ‘Damn you, Fry!’ he cried, slamming the table. ‘Blast you!’ The decision had already been made. Rustication until the end of term. Rustication meant temporary banishment home, only expulsion was worse. The camel’s back was beginning to bend and creak.

164 My father was already on his way. In the meantime I was to go upstairs and wait once more in my tish. The drive home was monumentally quiet, but I knew that words would come. My father’s analytical mind would not be content to know that I had erred and strayed from my ways like a lost sheep, nor would he simply forgive, forget, judge, punish or exhort. It would be far worse than that. He would need to understand. I did not want him to understand, no adolescent ever wants to be understood, which is why they complain about being misunderstood all the time, and most passionately of all I did not want him to know about Matthew. I am not sure that I thought then that Matthew was the root of the thieving. I am not sure that I know it now. I am sure, however, that he was at the root of the recklessness. He was at the root of all my emotions and I was not going to share them with anyone, least of all my parents, lest they somehow lead back to the truth. There was the inevitable analysis in the study, like the scenes that came on the mornings of the school report’s arrival, but more intense. Father at the desk in a dense fog of tobacco smoke, Mother on a sofa, alternately hopeful and tearful. I would become transfixed by the amount of smoke Father could inhale: after puffing and puffing at the pipe and ejecting the clouds from the side of his mouth, each cloud thicker than its predecessor, he would finally give one enormous puff and in one huge inhalation the thickest cloud of all would disappear, fractions of it emerging from his mouth and nostrils over the next minutes as he spoke. Sometimes a full ten minutes after this one massive inhalation he might laugh or snort, bringing up from the very bottom of the lungs one last wisp of smoke that had lingered there all that while. How he coped with the sullen ‘Don’t know’, ‘Don’t know’ that answered every question asked I cannot guess. He had perception enough to see that there was something there lodged deep within me that he could not reach with reason, cajolement or threat. He continued to analyse and theorise like. Holmes, of course, but like Holmes he knew that it was a cardinal error to theorise without sufficient data. One of his hypotheses was that he and I were very alike, an idea which I rejected as monstrous, nonsensical, absurd, unthinkable, insane and intolerable. I see the similarities now. His brain is better, his standards are higher and his capacity for work is far greater: he is, as a John Buchan hero might say, in almost all respects, the better man, but we do share characteristics. A particular colour of pride, a particular need to analyse. From my mother I have inherited qualities he lacks: an optimism, a desire to please, to cheer up and to gratify others, to make them feel good, and an ability to glide superficially, both where superficial gliding is actually a more efficient means of going forward than thrashing through murky waters and where superficial gliding is a kind of moral cowardice. I lack my mother’s goodness and ability to subsume her ego and I lack too her capacity to make everyone feel warmed by the radiancy of good nature. I think with my parents the old irony obtains: my mother is the practical one, my father the sentimentalist. I can far more easily imagine my mother coping with life on her own than my father. I don’t ever underestimate my father’s capacity to surprise and to solve problems, but nor do I forget that his very capacity to solve problems has burdened him with the propensity to find problems where none exists. We all know the ancient story of the Gordian knot, a tangle

165 so complex that it was said he who could untie it would rule the known world: Alexander simply slashed it open with his sword. My father could never, never cut a Gordian knot — he might complicate it further and eventually solve it, but by the time he did so the known world would have moved on. Michael Ramsay, Archbishop of Canterbury during my childhood and during my religious phase a hero and profound influence, was once accused by an interviewer of being wise. ‘Am I?’ he asked. ‘I don’t think so really. I think it is probably just the impression given by the absurd fecundity of my eyebrows.’ ‘Well, your Grace,’ the interviewer persisted, ‘how would you define wisdom?’ ‘Wisdom?’ Ramsay chewed the word around in his mouth. ‘Oh, I should say that wisdom is the ability to cope.’ On that definition, one with which I wholeheartedly concur, I should say my mother is the wiser of my parents. One inherits or absorbs just so much: my sneakiness, slyness and my wit, in its senses of funniness and of native wit, are all my own. My parents have wit in both those senses too, but it is not the same wit as mine, and best of all for them, each fits the other like teeth into a cog-wheel. From an early age I would watch them do The Times crossword each night. There was and is a type of clue that my father would always get and a type that my mother would always get, and between them they would, as it were, lick the platter clean. Occasionally they can complete a puzzle on their own, but I think they get infinitely more pleasure from doing it together. I could finish it by myself from a fairly early age and hated sharing it with anyone else, stiffening into cardboard if someone looked over my shoulder or asked for a clue. This is indicative of my need for independence, I suppose, proof that I didn’t need anyone in the way my parents needed each other, more than that, proof that I positively needed not to need, proof in other words, of fear. My father also feared the kind of mind I possessed. He knew I was a clever clogs. A smart-arse. He saw a Look & Learn kind of a mind, eagerly competitive with a pastichey, short-cutting brain and a frantic desire to see its name in print, its knowledge praised. It won’t surprise you to learn that I had once begged my parents to apply to be on Robert Robinson’s television quiz programme, Ask the Family. Yes, I really was that dreadful, that insupportably, toweringly, imponderably, unpardonably naff. By good fortune and sense my father would rather have sawn off his legs with the sharp edge of a piece of paper than gone anywhere near such a repulsive proceeding and he made that clear from the outset with a great snorting cloud of pipesmoke. My mother, God love her, may well have been prepared to bite the bullet on my behalf and go through with the horrid thing, but I suspect that even she, loyal to me ever, cheerfully relied on the blank certainty of my father’s absolute and categorical refusal. We know the type, and he knew the type, that’s the point. Blue Peter, Look & Learn, The Guinness Book of Records: facts, facts, facts. I exploded with facts much as contemporaries exploded with blackheads and Black Sabbath. Dates, capitals, inventors, authors, rivers, lakes and composers. I begged to be asked questions, begged to show off how much I knew, begged, like that little robot in the Short Circuit films, for Input... Input... Input... There’s nothing so desperately strange about this. It was perhaps rather more suburban a style than one might expect from a boy of my upbringing: my brother

166 preferred to dream of farming and flying and other pursuits more usual amongst the country-bred, but none the less I was one of the millions and millions of fact-collecting, did-you-know-ing, apparently-ing, it-is-a-little-known-f act-ing little shits that the world has put up with since Gutenberg first carved a moveable letter ‘a’, which, as every schoolboy tick like me knows, he did in Strasbourg round about 1436. Such a brain was not consonant with my father’s idea of intellect, work and the mind. The first and most urgent problem to be tackled however, was this incessant thieving. It was decided that I should see a psychiatrist and the man chosen was Gerard Vaughan, later to become a Government Health Minister, and already I think a Conservative Member of Parliament by this time. I believe he had been recommended by a parental friend, Tommy Stuttaford, then .a doctor and MP himself, but now the man hired by The Times to add footnotes to every news story that carries the slightest medical implication: Private Eye makes merciless fun of him in their ‘A Doctor Writes ...‘ column. The Stouts Hill School Magazine would have described him as an “Expert” in as many double inverted commas as their printer could spare. Vaughan had his surgery at Guy’s Hospital in London and thither my father and I repaired. I completed some Bender Gestalt tests, interpreted a Rorschach blot or two and chatted. The thieving was a little puzzling to Vaughan, who felt that I should really be the offspring of a diplomat or a soldier. Teenagers who stole often did so, it appeared, because they came from families who were constantly uprooting. It peeved Vaughan that I should come from such a stable background. Nevertheless, my problem was diagnosed as ‘developmental delay’ — academic maturity combined with emotional immaturity: a sixteen-year-old’s brain and a ten-year- old’s mind warring with each other inside a confused fourteen-year-old boy, resulting in an inability to concentrate, conform or settle. Nowadays a lot of what was wrong with me would no doubt be ascribed to Attention Deficit Disorder, tartrazine food colouring, dairy produce and air pollution. A few hundred years earlier it would have been demons, still the best analogy I think, but not much help when it comes to a cure. Vaughan’s cure came in the shape of an attractive yellow capsule called, if I remember rightly, Lentizol. The only effects, so far as I can remember, were a very dry mouth and terrible constipation. Perhaps this was part of the pill’s clinical function: they can’t steal if they’re on the bog kneading their stomach all day. Meanwhile, there was the problem of my academic work. If I was rusticated, it meant that I was at home for the rest of term. The following term, the Summer, was my 0 level term and my father was not about to let the grass grow under my feet, especially when it came to Maths, a subject I was absolutely certain to fail. Failure in Maths O level was disastrous because you couldn’t go on to do any A levels without it. I had passed English Language, the other essential, in November: why one sat an exam such as that so early I’ve no idea — simply to get it out of the way I suppose. Unfortunately for me, as I thought at the time, my father was as proficient in French, German, Latin and English Literature as he was at Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics. It was maths that he concentrated on however. He was to become my private tutor. This was the deepest hell imaginable. The man I most feared and dreaded in the world, in whose presence all intelligence, coherence and articulacy deserted me, teaching me mano a mano, tête à tête the subject I most feared and dreaded in the world.





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




167 How could he possibly understand how difficult maths was for me, he for whom mathematics was a language he spoke as a Norwegian speaks Norwegian, a Spaniard Spanish and a musician music? Worse was to come. He looked at the GCE Oxford and Cambridge Board O level maths syllabus and found it wanting. It was, in his judgement, weak, cheap, and Fundamentally Unsound. Mathematics was beautiful, he believed. It should be part of the arts and humanities side of a school, not the science side, he believed. Unlike a science, you did not have to know anything to engage in mathematics, merely how to count, he believed. Even that could be discovered from first principles, he believed. Calculus could be taught to a six-year-old, he believed. There were some French lessons too: he would take down an old copy of a favourite book of his, Daudet’s Lettres de Mon Moulin and we would go through it together after a day’s mathematics. Yes, a day’s mathematics, day after day after day. When he grasped the completeness of my ignorance and my incompetence he did not gulp or gasp, I’ll give him that. He stuck by his own beliefs and went right back to the beginning. He taught me something that I did not understand: the equals sign. I knew what 2+2=4 meant. I did not understand however even the rudimentary possibilities that flowed from that. The very thought of an equals sign approximating a pair of scales had never penetrated my skull. That you could do anything to an equation, so long as you did the same to each side, was a revelation to me. My father, never once flinching at such staggering ignorance, moved on. There came the second revelation, even more beautiful than the first. Algebra. Algebra, I suddenly saw, is what Shakespeare did. It is metonym and metaphor, substitution, transferral, analogy, allegory: it is poetry. I had thought its a’s and b’s were nothing more than fruitless (if you’ll forgive me) apples and bananas. Suddenly I could do simultaneous equations. Quadratic equations I pounced on because there was a formula you could remember for solving them. My father was not interested in my remembering formulas. Any fool can remember a formula. He wanted me to see why. So we went back to the Greeks, to Pythagoras and Euclid. Oh shit. Geometry. I hated geometry. He decided that we would set out together, as if we knew nothing,. to prove the suggestion that, so far as right-angled triangles were concerned, the square on the hypotenuse might well turn out to be equal to the sum of the squares on the other two sides. Proof? How could you prove such a thing? The whole idea was completely alien to me. I suggested spending an entire day drawing right-angled triangles of different sizes and checking. If they all conformed to this theorem then that would suit me. Ho-no. I don’t remember the proof, I remember it took in circles and segments and sectors and angles which were temporarily designated the value Theta. But I remember that we got there and that I had followed it all the way and I remember too that when the final, triumphant QED! was written on the bottom of the page I felt a thrill of genuine joy. We moved on to trigonometry and some very baffling propositions concerning, sin A

168 equalling something and cos A equalling something else, a pair of propositions that were on the A level pure maths syllabus and nothing to do with basic 0 level mathematics at all. I can’t claim my father made a mathematician out of me. I still speak only stumbling, schoolboy maths with an atrocious English accent. I never quite got the hang of vectors. I have damned Descartes eternally for the foul things. My father can vectorise anything from Dutch Elm Disease, to a sunrise, to the act of opening a tin of beans. Plotting things against things, writing 4x = (x2 — y2) on a graph line, that sort of runic weirdness — absolute mystery to me. It was a breakthrough, a breakthrough that enabled me to pass Maths 0 level and a breakthrough in my relationship with my father. It was a permanent breakthrough in that I never hated him again (feared and dreaded, never hated) but temporary in as much as it altered nothing once I was back at school for the summer. Matthew Osborne still walked the planet, still inhabited almost every waking moment of my life, still gazed at me from every tree, every dawn, every brick in every wall. Indeed so brilliant a teacher was my father that he awoke a fire in me which was extrinsic to mathematics and which, amongst other things, I used to fuel my greatest love, poetry. Novels meant less to me (unless they were stories about my kind of love) and rightly too, for while the novel is an adult invention, the poem is universal but often most especially charged in the mind of the adolescent. The most common betrayal the literary-minded make as they grow up is to abandon their love of poetry and to chase the novel instead. To find oneself believing, as I did when in my twenties, that John Keats for example was strictly for moonstruck adolescents is as stupid and ignorant as to think that grown-ups shouldn’t ride bicycles. More stupid, more stupid by far. John Keats may not seem as sophisticated a paperback for the hip pocket of a self-conscious student as Beckett, Bellow or Musil, for example, but his greatness is not something that can be diminished by the stupidity of the newly adult. You can’t outgrow Keats any more than you can outgrow nitrogen. That isn’t what I was trying to say, however you’ve got me off the point again. The very act of my father’s teaching inspired in me a love of the act of teaching in and of itself, that’s the point. I don’t suppose he had ever taught anyone anything before, but he taught me how to teach far more than he taught me how to ‘do maths’. I was so fascinated by my own progress that I became more excited by that than by what I was progressing in. Part of it may have been connected again (of course it was) to Matthew. I fantasised awakening his mind to something in the same way. Not in order to be admired, not in order to win affection, but for the sheer pleasure of the thing, the sheer love of Matthew and the sheer love, the gardener’s love, of watching an idea germinate and blossom. I must suppose that my father, for all his apparently cold, Holmesian practicality, was moti- vated by love too, love of ideas and love of me. Self-love too, but self-love is fundamental to any other kind. Amour propre can also mean proper love, after all. My father had believed that I did not know how to think and he had tried to show me how. Showing, again, not telling, had proved efficacious. He knew that I was a natural mimic, intellectually as well as vocally and comically, but he knew that Mimesis is not the same as Reason. I had had good teachers. At prep school an English master called Chris Coley had awoken my first love of poetry with lessons on Ted Hughes, Thom Gunn, Charles Causley and Seamus Heaney. His predecessor, Burchall, was more a Kipling-and-none-- of-this-damned-poofery sort of chap, indeed he actually straight-facedly taught U and

169 Non-U pronunciation and usage as part of lessons: ‘A gentleman does not pronounce Monday as Monday, but as Mundy. Yesterday is yesterdi. The first ‘e’ of interesting is not sounded,’ and so on. I remember boys would get terrible tongue lashings if he ever overheard them using words like ‘toilet’ or ‘serviette’. Even ‘radio’ and ‘mirror’ were not to be borne. It had to be ‘wireless’ and ‘glass’ or ‘looking-glass’. Similarly we learned to say formidable, not formidable, primarily not primarily and circumstance not circumstance and never, for a second would such horrors as cirumstahntial or substahntial be countenanced. I remember the monumentally amusing games that would go on when a temporary matron called Mrs Amos kept trying to tell boys to say ‘pardon’ or ‘pardon me’ after they had burped. The same spin upper-middle-class families get into to this very day when Nanny teaches the children words that Mummy doesn’t think are quite the thing. ‘Manners! Say “pardon me ‘But we’re not allowed to, Matron.’ ‘Stuff and nonsense!’ It came to a head one breakfast. Naturally it was I who engineered the moment. Burchall was sitting at the head of our table, Mrs Amos just happened to be passing. ‘Bre-e-eughk!’ I belched. ‘Say “pardon me", Fry.’ ‘You dare to use that disgusting phrase, Fry and I’ll thrash you to within an inch of your life,’ said Burchall, not even looking up from his Telegraph —pronounced, naturally, Tellygraff. ‘I beg your pardon, Mr Burchall?’ ‘You can beg what you like, woman.’ ‘I am trying to instil,’ said Mrs Amos, (and if you’re an Archers listener you will be able to use Linda Snell’s voice here for the proper effect, it saves me having to write ‘A am traying to instil’ and all that), ‘some manners into these boys. Manners maketh man, you know.’ Burchall, who looked just like the 30s and 40s actor Roland Young — same moustache, same eyes — put down his Tellygraff, glared at Mrs Amos and then addressed the room in a booming voice. ‘If any boy here is ever told to say “Pardon me”, “I beg your pardon”, or heaven forfend, “I beg pardon”, they are to say to the idiot who told them to say it, “I refuse to lower myself to such depths, madam.” Is that understood?’ We nodded vigorously. Matron flounced out with a ‘Well, reelly!’ and Burchall resumed his study of the racing column. I can’t call such a teacher an inspiration, but there was certainly something of him in the mad general I played in Blackadder, and any teaching that drew attention to diversity in language, even the most absurd snobbish elements of it, was a delight to me. At Uppingham Stokes inspired in me a love of Jonathan Swift, William Morris, George Orwell and those two great Victorians, Tennyson and Browning. In fact my mother had already given me a great reverence for Browning. She, like my father and myself, has a prodigious memory. Hers is especially remarkable when it comes to people and to poetry. She used to reel off a lot of Browning when I was small. No one, sadly, has ever inculcated in me the slightest admiration for the novels of Thomas Hardy or D. H. Lawrence, although I adore the poetry of both, the first being quite magisterially great, the second being charming and often very funny.

170 So although, as I say, I have been lucky enough to have had some good teachers at the various schools I’ve inflicted myself upon, none of them came close to my parents. Someone once said that all autobiography is a form of revenge. It can also be a form of thank-you letter. I returned to Uppingham for the summer term of 1972, better at sums, more fired up by ideas and the idea of ideas, but not fundamentally chastened. I was chastened by the shame and disgrace of having been found and proved a thief, but boys, as Frowde had told me they would be, are limitlessly generous, and they were inclined to treat the subject with immense tact, as if I had been the victim of an unfortunate illness, just as the citizens of Samuel Butler’s Erewhon treated their criminals. I was probably in my greatest period of physical growth too, shooting up an inch a fortnight it seemed to me. Pubescence was kicking in strong, making up for lost time. I never, thank God, was prey to spots, as acne was called, but my hair became a little lank, and my eyes took on that strange adolescent brightness that lives under a film of sullenness. They were eyes that looked out, but never want to be looked into. Summer term was Matthew’s term because it was cricket term. I had always disliked summer, a hot, sticky, asthma-inducing time. It looked pretty, but it bit and it stung. I had a terror of insects, moths in particular, horrible scaly moths which flew through open bedroom windows and fluttered about the light bulb as I tried to read. I could not rest or relax in any room which contained a moth. Butterflies were fine during the day, but moths disgusted and terrified me. For Matthew’s sake, I tried to become good at cricket. Just so that I might occasionally find myself in the same nets as him, or be able to talk about Brian Close or Hampshire’s prospects for the Gillette Cup and other such crickety arcana. It is impossible for me to separate Matthew and cricket, so my current passion for the game must have much to do with him. As I write, it looks as if Australia will at least retain the Ashes at Trent Bridge (today is the Saturday of the 5th Test) and you have no idea what it is costing me to keep away from the television and radio — wireless I do beg Mr Burchall’s pardon. There is only one story to tell of this summer term and it is the story of the small act of physical consummation that took place between me and Matthew. Consummation is perhaps not the right word: it did not endorse or set the seal on our relationship, it did not fructify or sanctify it. It was a quick and sweet sexual act between two (from Matthew’s point of view) friends. At least I can say that it did not ruin the relationship or change my feelings for Matthew. It did not fortify them, for sex was never, as I have said, the point. Come to think of it I don’t know that love has a point, which is what makes it so glorious. Sex has a point, in terms of relief and, sometimes procreation, but love, like all art, as Oscar said, is quite useless. It is the useless things that make life worth living and that make life dangerous too: wine, love, art, beauty. Without them life is safe, but not worth bothering with. It was after a late ‘net’, as we cricketers call practice. Matthew had asked if he might bowl at me for a while. His chief glory was his batting, but he bowled too. He was left- handed for both batting and bowling and had just taken an interest in wrist spin, which meant that he was experimenting with that peculiar ball, the chinaman. I was by no means a good enough batsman to deal with any kind of spinning ball: anything bowled on a good

171 length at any pace, in fact, had me in trouble, but I was- pleased to be asked (indeed had hung around casually all afternoon talking to others, his brother principally, occasionally to Matthew, being amusing and charming, simply in the hope that there might be such an outcome) and did my best. After a while we stopped and looked around. We were almost the only two on the Middle by this time, the whole wide sward was deserted. Two or three late games of tennis were going on at the Fircroft end, otherwise we had the place to ourselves. Tennis was despised by Garth Wheatley, the master in charge of cricket and by the professional, an ex-Leicestershire player whose name, I am ashamed to say I have forgotten. They both called it, disdainfully, ‘woolly-balls’. ‘Too many promising cricketers are being lured away from the game by the effeminate glamour of woolly-balls,’ I heard Wheatley say once, with a disparaging sniff. Matthew closed his cricket-bag and picked up his blazer. ‘Oh, I love summer,’ he sighed, looking around. ‘Me too,’ I said. ‘Hang on, what am I talking about? I hate it. ‘What do you mean?’ We started to walk, aimlessly it seemed, in a direction that took us away from both our Houses, away from the school, towards nothing but fields. I explained my hatred of insects, my asthma and my inability to cope with heat. ‘Let’s face it,’ I said. ‘I’m made for the winter. The more clothes I keep on the better I look. In shorts I’m a mess. And unlike you, I don’t look glamorous in cricket whites.’ ‘Oh, that’s rubbish,’ he said and then after the briefest of pauses. ‘I quite fancy you, for a start.’ ‘Oh yeah?’ I said, and gave him a push. ‘Trying to seduce me are you?’ ‘Yeah!’ he said, pushing back and knocking me over. It was all that quick and that silly. Nothing more than rolling and tickling in the long grass that turned into rubbing and sliding and finally angrily rapid mutual masturbation. No kissing, but at least plenty of giggling and smiling. Sex without smiling is as sickly and base as vodka and tonic without ice. He left me there, lying in the grass. I leaned up on one elbow and watched him go, until his shape, cricket cream-coloured against the grass, disappeared from view. He never once turned back. I lay back, stared at the sky and fell asleep. I passed Maths Q level, not with distinction, but I passed. The only exam I failed was Physics, a determined cock snooked at my father to remind him that I was still myself. He had not made me his creature, his good science boy. For physics, above all, was what father was about. I did not just fail Physics, I ploughed it spectacularly. Such was my pride that I could not bear to be seen to fail anything unless it was quite deliberate. There had been a question in the examination paper which asked about something called EMF. To many of you reading this, EMF probably means that Forest of Dean combo whose excellent single ‘Unbelievable’ had us all foot-tapping five or six years ago, to Mr Pattinson the poor sod whose job it was to try and get some physics into my head, EMF meant ElectroMagnetic Force, or Field or something vaguely similar, please don’t ask me to elaborate.

172 The question read: Describe the EMF of a bicycle torch battery. Well, I hadn’t the faintest idea what they were on about, so I spent the entire physics exam drawing a bicycle. I wasn’t bad at this, Object Drawing was the part of the Art ‘O’ level that I was best at, my painting had never again reached the heights of the IAPS award-winning Unforgettable Character, but copying, I could always copy. The bicycle I drew had a crossbar, saddle bags (an open cross-section of which revealed the presence of a Tupperware box containing an apple, a Mars bar and some cheese and chutney sandwiches) and, naturally, torches front and rear. My last act, at the end of the exam was to rule a line towards the front torch and write at the other end: ‘This is the torch that contains the battery that contains the EMF that the questioner seems so desperate to know about.’ O levels in those days came in Grades 1 to 6, which were passes, and then 7, 8 and which were fails. I achieved none of these. I achieved something far more magnificent. I was awarded an Unclassified, which included a letter to the school. I don’t think my father was hugely surprised when the results came through in the summer holidays. At least I had passed Maths, that was the great thing. I decided, as my third year began, my Sixth Form year, that I would do English, French and Ancient History for A level. My father tried, with half-hearted idealism to suggest that there would be more of a challenge to me intellectually if I chose Maths, but my choice prevailed. Some two or three weeks after my fifteenth birthday, therefore, I was a member of Lower VIA. I was far too young to be a sixth former. Too young literally, and much too young if one believed Gerard Vaughan’s diagnosis of ‘developmental delay’. I had the joy of Rory Stuart, a remarkable teacher. Actually a Cambridge classicist of distinction, his enthusiasm (and he was the living embodiment of that divine Greek quality) had turned to English Literature. He went on to become head of English at Westminster and then, on the death of a plantswoman aunt whose cottage and grounds he inherited, he altered direction once more, this time reinventing himself as a landscape gardener. He calls himself, with splendid impudence, RHS Gardens (using his genuine initials but infuriating the pompous arses of the Royal Horticultural Society in Wisley) and does a little teaching still at the nearby Cheltenham Ladies’ College. He co-wrote a book about making a garden with the novelist Susan Hill, a book I thoroughly recommend. His pupils are spread wide around the world and feel themselves to be part of a special club. Sometimes I will bump into someone in the street who’ll say, ‘Excuse me, weren’t you taught by Rory Stuart?’ and we will stand there together swapping stories about him and what he did for us. Like me, there was something immensely distant and aloof about him in private, he was very unknowable there, but once his metaphorical teaching cap was on, he was energetic, charged and boundlessly creative. Anything that was said he could open like a flower, examine as a geologist might examine a stone or a squirrel a nut: a stupid and flippant remark could be as excitedly chased down as serious. Every remark or thought from any boy came to him as if it was utterly new and vibrating with possibility.

173 Given what I have already said about my parents, Stuart was the teacher that some are lucky enough to have in their lives. Others will always blame the lack of such a being on their failure to progress. Maybe they are right to do so, but I have always disbelieved that Sicilian saying about revenge being a dish best served cold. I feel that — don’t you? — when I see blinking, quivering octogenarian Nazi war criminals being led away in chains. Why not then? It’s too late now. I want to see them taken back in time and punished then. There were pictures of Pol Pot last week, tremblingly enchained: again, too late one feels, too late. Blame, certainly, is a dish only edible when served fresh and warm. Old blames, grudges and scores congeal and curdle and cause the most terrible indigestion. There were those who might have been able to save me from myself. It is possible that somewhere in the chain of events from Chesham Prep to prison I could look back and say, ‘He failed, she failed, they never tried,’ but where would that get me now? Off the hook? I don’t feel that I’m on one. ‘If my devils are to leave me, I am afraid my angels will take flight as well,’ said Rilke in sharp defiance of the future industry of TV and self-help-book exorcism. Maybe it’s my mother’s side in me that makes me one who would rather look to people to thank and praise than people to blame and damn. Don’t get me wrong, unlike my mother, I’ve a wicked tongue in my head and when it comes, for example, to that pallid, fraudulent, dangerous twentieth-century version of true mysticism, the charlatanism of runes, tarot, horoscopy, telepathy, rootless opinion, stale second-hand ‘open-mindedness’ and all that shite, I get blisteringly unforgiving and furious. I am capable of being horribly polemic and culpatory in many arenas, but in the arena of the past I see no point. Had I been palpably abused in any senses of that much (ha!) abused word, then maybe I would think differently —as it is and as I have never tired of restating, I am the one who did most of the abusing: I abused trust, love, kindness and myself. As a sixth-former life was, technically, more relaxed. As a fifteen-year-old it was, naturally, growing more complex every day. My feeling for Matthew had not altered. We never repeated the allegro rapture of our one sexual experiment, and we never referred to it. I still don’t know why it happened. Maybe he had guessed the depth of my feeling for him and had thought it was founded in lust and had as a result wanted to get all that out of the way because he valued my friendship. Maybe he was being kind. Maybe he was just a healthy fourteen-year-old who fancied a quick bit of nookie. Maybe he felt for me what I felt for him. I’ll never know and that is as it should be. I’ll always have that memory at least... the heat of him, the heat of him from his day’s exercise, the heat that radiated from the base of his throat, the heat under his arms, the heat-of-the-moment heat of that moment. Oh dear, will these memories never lose their heat? I acted in a play in Trog Richardson’s brand new Uppingham Theatre, being amongst the first three to step on its stage. Patrick Kinmonth, Adrian Corbin and I were the weird sisters (none weirder, believe me) in the theatre’s baptismal production of Macbeth. I had read David Magarshak’s translation of Stanislavsky’s Art of the Theatre and had decided that acting was my destiny. The director, Gordon Braddy, wanted the witches to design their own costumes, a decision he came to regret, since I announced that I wanted my costume to hang with fresh livers, lungs, kidneys, hearts, spleens and other innards, all bound by intestines. And

174 why not, I argued, produce real eyes of frog and genuine tongues of newt from the cauldron? This was considered too much, but my offal-trimmed costume was permitted. The costume itself was constructed of strips of PVC. Kinmonth, who is now a highly respected painter anyway so it wasn’t fair, designed something excellent. Corbin too managed to snip something out of plastic that was at least wearable. The Christine- Keeler-meets-the-little-red-murdererfrom-Don’t-Look-Now nightmare that I threw together haunts me still and, I swear to you, for I have returned many times, the smell of rotten guts still informs the under-stage dressing-rooms. I returned to that Uppingham Theatre for the first time, as it happens, in 1981, just after leaving Cambridge, with Hugh Laurie, Emma Thompson, Tony Slattery and the rest of our Footlights troupe, to perform prior to Edinburgh. Uppingham had become, because of Chris Richardson, a common stop-off place for comedians. It had started with Richardson designing the set for Rowan Atkinson’s original one-man-show. Rowan always tried out his new material at Uppingham and the Footlights followed. I have since been back to give little talks and readings and so forth, Old Boy on the Telly, Sleb Speaker, all that, but every time I stand on that stage I see Richard Fawcett as Seyton and Third Murderer, Tim Montagnon as Banquo, David Game laying on as Macduff and above all Rory Stuart as Macbeth. Like most actors I forget the lines of any play a week or so after the run is over, but I have forgotten hardly a single word of Macbeth, from ‘When’ to ‘Scone’. It is too far distant to recall Rory’s performance in any detail, but I was thrilled, simply entranced, by the way he delivered the climax to the great ‘If it were done when ‘tis done’ soliloquy — And Pity, like a naked new-born babe, Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherubim, horsed Upon the sightless couriers of the air, Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, That tears shall drown the wind. Hoo-werr... I still shudder at it. I may have felt guilt and fear of punishment in my day, but it was never quite that bad. A few people whispering in corners, the soul of my dead grandfather, the sad-eyed Christ, those things have bothered and shamed me, but I never imagined heaven’s cherubim blowing the horrid deed in every eye or Pity, like a naked new-born babe, striding the blast. God where did he get it from, that man, that Shakespeare? None the less, nemesis was drawing up her skirts ready to charge, and as always with that fell dame, I wasn’t looking for her in the right places. My parents, with as much realism, I fear, as generosity, had made it plain that if ever I was short of money, I was to go to Mr Frowde and he would advance me enough to buy as many of Mrs Lanchberry’s lard-fried eggs and her husband’s cream slices as I could eat. It must have been something more than slightly sickening and slightly frightening for them to know that the most efficient way to stop me stealing was to let me have as much money as I wanted. It’s like proving Pythagoras by drawing and measuring as many different right-angled triangles as you can. I had more or less stayed out of trouble for the first month or so of that sixth-form term. The work was fun: I liked Anouilh’s Antigone, the first French set text we had reached, and I liked Ancient History too, which was actually a cop-out: I should have chosen Latin and Greek, but I saw Ancient History as a good dossy compromise.

175 I developed around this time a mania for climbing around the roofs of the school buildings. Any psychologist who can interpret this convincingly for me will earn my thanks. The School Hall, a great Victorian building with onion domes at each corner and the Chapel itself, both yielded wonderful runs of leaded channels and strange platforms from which one could survey the school beneath. I knew where Biffo Bailey, the school porter kept the keys to everything and had become a master at the art of this particular form of non-theftual cat-burglary. (‘Did he just say non-theftual?’ ‘He did, you know.’ ‘I thought so. Shall I, or will you?’ ‘Best let it pass I think.’ ‘Really?’ ‘Mm. Only encourage him otherwise.’ ‘Well, if you say so. Personally I’ve half a mind to call the police.’) Both the Chapel and the Hall also contained two enormous Walker organs, with gigantic thirty-two foot wood diapasons. If you stuck a piece of paper over the vent of one (I’m sure there’s a better name for it than ‘vent’, but I’ve lost Howard Goodall’s telephone number) a single one-second blast on a bottom A would break the paper in two. Best of all, the lectern could be raised to reveal a huge array of presets. Between each of the three keyboards, you see, were buttons numbered one to, I think, eight. The organist, instead of having to grab at and pull out a clutch of different stops while in mid-Toccata, could just press Button 3 say, which would automatically push out a preset combination of, for example, viol, tromba and clarion. I discovered, one Saturday afternoon while the rest of the school was thrilling to the excitements of the Oundle match or whatever frantic tourney was being enacted on the field of battle, that I could alter these presets, and I did so. All you needed, with the lectern lifted and balanced on your head, was to use the tip of a biro to flick a series of dip-switches, as I believe they’re called. I changed every preset which was loud and thunderous to a preset that used one feeble oboey wail and every preset which was dulcet and faint to a great combinatory blast of the very loudest, most thundering pipes. The following morning, Sunday, as we walked down to the Chapel I explained to Richard Fawcett, Jo Wood and a few others what I had done. ‘You wait,’ I said. ‘You just wait.’ The organ on Sundays was usually played by one of the music staff rather than a boy. It would either be Dr Peschek, whose son Dickson was at the school and a friend, or by Mr Holman who had wild dark curly hair and looked like Professor Calculus from the Tintin books. As we reached the Magic Carpet, I saw Holman hurrying along with sheaves of music under his arms. Splendid, I thought. Splendid. The result was indeed splendid. The moment for the entry of the choir arrived and Holman, as he improvised the quiet preludey music that organists favour while congregations settle, was beginning to look a little rattled already. A huge blasting fart had emerged in the middle of one of his gentle, meandering doodles and blown back the hair of the first two rows of School House who were sitting in front of the diapason array and had directed at him the most indignant

176 looks. This had unnerved him and we could see, between peeping fingers, that he was beginning to lose faith in his beloved presets. But there was no time for him to do anything about it, the chaplain and servers were there at the back with the choir and candle-bearers, it was time for action and the procession. Holman raised his two hands, a tiny knuckle crack was heard as he bent his fingers and —‘Neeeeeeeeee...’ Handel’s stirring anthem ‘Thine Be The Glory’, instead of roaring the faithful to their feet, peeped like a shy mouse from the wainscoting. Headman at the back of the procession, shot a look up at the organ loft, and Holman’s wild face, reflected in the mirror for us all to see, turned a bright shade of scarlet. The fingers of one hand flew around the stops, pulling frantically, while the other hand vamped ineffectually and the feet trod up and down the pedals which gave out tiny squeaking thirds and fifths, the kind of waily wheeze someone produces when they pick up a mouth-organ for the first time. The school rose uncertainly to its feet, all save Jo Wood, Richard Fawcett and I, who were under the pew, biting hassocks and weeping with joy. Further stabs of delight assailed us when we saw, during sermons and lessons, Holman furtively lifting the lectern and trying to make adjustments, looking for all the world like the form’s bad boy peeping at a porn-mag in his desk. A few weeks later the school had the excitement to look forward to of a Day Off. The kingdom was to celebrate the excitements of the Silver Wedding of the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh and had declared a Monday Bank Holiday in its patriotic fervour. Jo Wood and I had even more to look forward to, for Geoff Frowde had given us permission to go to London. I had a meeting of the Sherlock Holmes Society to attend, and had invited Jo to come along as my guest. For many years now I had been a member of this harmlessly dotty sodality. I had been the youngest member for a long while, though by now some snot-nosed little creep had limbo-danced under me to that distinction. The organisation was run by eccentric men like Lord Gore-Booth, the President, who dressed up as Holmes every year when the Society went to Switzerland to re-enact that final, fateful tussle between Moriarty and Holmes by the Reichenbach Falls. Gore-Booth’s wonderful daughter Celia who died way before her time, (I think she was his daughter, not niece) I got to know many years later when she was one of the many remarkable actors in the troupe known, slightly embarrassingly, as Théâtre de Complicité. Another leading light was the editor of the Journal, the Marquess, or possibly Marquis (I have no Debrett’s to hand, I fear) of Donegal. The Journal ran fierce articles on hot Holmesian topics and ran a correspondence page calling itself ‘The Egg Spoon’, in honour of the item of cutlery that Watson wagged petulantly at Holmes one breakfast very early in their relationship, Watson using the splendid phrase, if I remember rightly, ‘Ineffable twaddle!’ to describe an article he was reading, which turned out of course, to have been written by Holmes himself. The usual meeting room was the old Royal Commonwealth Club in Villiers Street, off the Strand (deemed propitious I suppose, since Holmes made his first appearance in The Strand Magazine). Anyhoo, as Ned Ryerson likes to say in Groundhog Day, Frowde had consented to our attendance of a Saturday evening meeting of the Society. We had booked hotel rooms

177 for ourselves in Russell Square and were due to return on Monday afternoon, which gave us almost three days of London. Only it didn’t, because we had rushes of blood to the head and went to the cinema and watched A Clockwork Orange, The Godfather and Cabaret, over and over and over and over and over again for four days in a row. Hell of a year for cinema, 1972. All the films were X-certificate of course, but both Jo and I looked as if we just might pass as eighteen. I don’t know what it was that possessed us. It was as if we were gripped by some uncontrollable force. We simply could not move away from those films. I think we took in Fritz the Cat four or five times as well, but it was that trio that slammed us amidships like three gigantic icebergs. We could hardly have chosen better, I will say that for ourselves. I don’t know if our respective parents thought the other child was to blame, or constituted a Bad Influence on the other (I’m not sure my parents ever quite got the point of Jo) but I think we would both agree that it was a simple case of compulsion. If either had left to go back to school, the other would probably have stayed. We were completely mesmerised by an utterly new world and all its possibilities. Art had gripped me, poetry, music, comedy, cricket and love had gripped me and have me in their grip still, but cinema. Films have a peculiar power all their own. Maybe we had found a rock and roll for ourselves, something that was neither solipsistic, tragic and sublime like music, nor egocentrically bullying like comedy. I can’t explain. Until that moment, I had been content and perfectly delighted to watch The Guns of Navarone and You Only Live Twice; now films suddenly seemed to have reached a puberty like mine and were the Real Thing. It was me, of course, not films that had really changed, though there is no doubt that it was a good crop and that there was something new about their style and their treatment of subject matter. As every scene of The Godfather unwound in front of my disbelieving eyes, from the wedding to the final famous closing of the door and the shot of the leather chair, Uppingham School looked smaller and smaller and smaller. I think I even forgot about Matthew. I remember feeling the desire to see the films with him, the need to show them to him, but while I was watching them, neck up, front row, over and over and over again, I forgot everything except the world of each film. When we returned to Uppingham, still blinking at the light and at the dawning realisation of our madness, all was up. In my case the camel’s back had been snapped completely in two by this final straw and I was instantly expelled, not even given the chance to say goodbye to a single friend. In Jo’s case, punishment came in the form of rustication until the end of term. I shall never forget my father’s only words in the car as he, yet again, drove his infuriating, ungrateful, monstrous middle child home. ‘We will discuss this sorry business later.’ We did discuss it later, this sorry business, of course we did. One aspect, however that we never discussed, oddly enough, was the films. To my father, and I can see why, this was disobedience, rebellion, wildness, attention-seeking ... all kinds of things. He saw the urge to self-destruct, but he did not choose to examine the weapon I had selected. I think that is a fair and a reasonable thing for anyone, but it is strange that we never spoke about the

178 films. One could argue that there was something in each of them that spoke directly to me. In Cabaret there was homosexuality in the form both of divine decadence and of guilty, smothered English shame; there was guilty, smothered Jewish shame too; there was the tension and love between a stuffy Englishman unable to scream or express himself and the fantasising, romantic Sally Bowles, each equally doomed and equally in pain, each one half of me. In A Clockwork Orange there was the bad, uncontrollable, rebellious, intolerable and intolerant adolescent, with his mad romping love of Beethoven (even Rossini got a look in too) and society’s need to constrain and emasculate him, to drive away both his devils and his angels and stop him from being himself. In The Godfather there was ... hell, this is pointless, there is everything in The Godfather. Didn’t Woody Allen say that all literature was a footnote to Faust? Perhaps all adolescence is a dialogue between Faust and Christ. We tremble on the brink of selling that part of ourselves that is real, unique, angry, defiant and whole for the rewards of attainment, achievement, success and the golden prizes of integration and acceptance; but we also in our great creating imagination, rehearse the sacrifice we will make: the pain and terror we will take from others’ shoulders; our penetration into the lives and souls of our fellows; our submission and willingness to be rejected and despised for the sake of truth and love and, in the wilderness, our angry rebuttals of the hypocrisy, deception and compromise of a world which we see to be so false. There is nothing so self-righteous nor so right as an adolescent imagination.

179 Breaking Out 1 THE REPLACEMENT FOR Uppingham that my parents chose was The Paston School in the Norfolk market town of North Walsham. A direct grant grammar school (there had been some point to that Eleven Plus after all, it seemed) its greatest claim to fame was its old boy, the ‘Norfolk Hero’ as he is known around these parts, Horatio Nelson. Having been expelled from Uppingham (‘asked to leave’ is the proper expression) in November 1972 I naturally had to start at Paston in the Spring Term of 1973. The school, which was not accustomed to fifteen-year-olds in the Sixth Form, suggested that I retake all my O levels in the summer of 1974, when I would be sixteen, only then might it be appropriate to think about A levels. Well I mean, what? The blow to my pride was immense; never had a pride been that so deserved a great blow, but that was not how I looked at it. On hearing this news, I instantly, before I had so much as crossed its threshold, detested and despised all things Pastoman. By this time I think my parents were beginning to worry about any influence I might have on my sister, Jo. She turned eight years old about the time of my expulsion and had remained entirely devoted to me. Being a girl, it was not considered so necessary, according to the curious logic of these things, for her to board, so she attended Norwich High School for Girls, a private school which involved the snazziest green uniform you can imagine. Now that I was starting at The Paston, a day school too, Jo and I would breakfast together and spend evenings together every single day. My bus went from Cawston to North Walsham, Jo was enmeshed in a complex network of school runs with the parents of other girls around the Booton area, but essentially we were in the same boat now. Roger naturally stayed at Fircroft, where he was to go on to become a House Polly and then School Polly and Captain of House and I would see him only in the holidays. Paston School lived up to all my prejudices, as things always will to the prejudiced. I did not take to the place one bit. I can remember barely anything about it, except that it was there that I started to smoke and there that I learned to play pinball: not within the school grounds, but within the town of North Walsham. For within a very short space of time I started to cut the school dead. I would get on the Cawston bus and dismount at either Aylsham or North Walsham and then head straight for a café and spend the day pinballing, listening to records by Slade, the Sweet, Wizzard and Suzi Quattro and smoking interminable Carlton Premiums, Number Sixes and Embassy Regals. The Paston took this insolence for about a term and a half before suggesting to my parents that maybe I might be happier somewhere else. I wish I could write more about the place, but I simply do not remember a thing. I drive through North Walsham sometimes, on my way to visit friends in the old wool town of Worsted, and I see the school but I wouldn’t be able to tell you what any of the buildings were used for. I suppose there were assembly halls, sports fields and all the rest

180 of it, but the entire establishment is a vacuum in my mind. My whole being was concentrating entirely on Matthew Osborne and nothing else in the world existed. I thought of writing to him, but could not begin to express my thoughts, or if I did, I did not dare to communicate them. So I did the next best thing and wrote poetry. Once The Paston had dislodged me, my ever patient parents thought that perhaps what I needed was the more mature atmosphere of a Sixth Form College, a place where pupils were called students, lessons were called lectures, where smoking was not against the rules, where independence of mind and eccentricity were tolerated. The place available to me, which could take me on as a weekly boarder, was the Norfolk College of Arts and Technology in King’s Lynn, known as Norcat. I remember visiting the vice- principal, and my mother enquiring about Oxbridge entrance. The VP gave a kind of derisive snort and said that, looking at my record he really didn’t think that this was an option we need consider. I shall never forget the indignant flush that suffused my mother’s face, the closest to fury I had seen her come for a very long time. I had the summer of 1973 to fill then, before starting on a two-year A level course of English, French and History of Art. I took a job at the Cawston Winery, a little plant that produced kits for home brewing and home wine-making. My job involved making cardboard boxes, millions of the bastards. The rest of the time however, was spent writing poems and starting novels. Always the same subject. The subject of most of The Liar and the subject of this book. There was always a Me and there was always a Matthew. If I were to quote now extensively from any of these (I have just spent a very bloody seven hours going though them) it would hurt you, dear reader, and me, too much. Most of the shorter poems have angry, pompous teenage titles like ‘Song of Dissonance and Expedience’ and ‘Open Order: A Redress’, a punning title this, which will only make sense if you’ve ever drilled in the CCF or armed services. This was too the summer in which I wrote these words. To Myself: Not To Be Read Until I Am Twenty-Five I know what you will think when you read this. You will be embarrassed. You will scoff and sneer. Well I tell you now that everything I feel now, everything I am now is truer and better than anything I shall ever be. Ever. This is me now, the real me. Every day that I grow away from the me that is writing this now is a betrayal and a defeat. I expect you will screw this up into a ball with sophisticated disgust, or at best with tolerant amusement but deep down you will know, you will know that you are smothering what you really, really were. This is the age when I truly am. From now on my life will be behind me. I tell you now, THIS IS TRUE — truer than anything else I will ever write, feel or know. WHAT I AM NOW IS ME, WHAT I WILL BE IS A LIE. I can dimly, just dimly, recall writing it. A whole condition of mind swims back into me every time I look at it, and swam back all the more strongly when I typed it out for you just now. I won’t go so far as to call it a Proustian petite madeleine, one of those

181 epiphanic memory revivifiers, for the memory has always been there, but it still has the power to create a feeling like hot lead leaking into my stomach, a feel-good pain that was both the dreaded demon and the welcome companion of my adolescence. It was a strange piece of writing to happen upon as I did recently, going through all my old papers, writings, poems and scrapbooks, and it’s a strange thing to look at now. What would you think if you read such a message to yourself? The past is a foreign country, they do things differently there. The Go-Between, the novel whose celebrated opening words those are, has long been a favourite of mine. Actually, they were filming Harold Pinter’s adaptation of it in Norfolk round about the time I wrote that letter to myself. I had read the book and bicycled off to Melton Constable to see if they needed extras. They didn’t, of course. I knew that the past was a foreign country, and knew too that it followed logically that the future must be abroad; in other words I knew that it was my destiny to become a foreigner, a stranger to myself. I was passionately patriotic about my own age, a fierce believer in the rightness and justness of adolescence, the clarity of its vision, the unfathomable depths and insurmountable heights of its despair and its joy. The colours that shone and vibrated so strongly though its eyes were the true colours of life, this I knew. Because I had read a great deal I knew as well that one day I would see things in different colours, take up citizenship in a different country, the country of the adult, and I hated my future self because of it. I wanted to stay behind in adolescence and fight for its rights and I knew that the moment I left it I would care only for the rights of my new age, my adulthood with all its falsities and failures. In those days loyalty to youth usually meant loyalty to ideas, political ideas chiefly. Ageing was seen as compromise and hypocrisy because it seemed inevitably to entail a selling out of ideals, environmental ideals now, but political then. For me, however, all this meant nothing. I was not even remotely interested in politics, the environment, the bomb or the poverty of the Third World. Only one thing counted for me then, Matthew, Matthew, Matthew, and I suspected, quite rightly, that one day love would count for less. I did not suspect, however, that one further, finer day far, far forward, love would come round to counting for everything again. A lot of salt water was to flow down the bridge, the bent bridge of my nose, before that day would come. I had fully determined, you see, to Do My Best at Norcat, and I believed that this would involve a number of fundamental alterations to my nature. I believed it meant I must subdue my sexuality and become heterosexual. I believed it meant I must bury all thoughts of Matthew and convince myself they were part of ‘a phase’ one of those ‘intense schoolboy friendships’ that you ‘grow out of’ and I believed it meant that I would get my head down and work. My writings then, were an attempt at expulsion, catharsis, exorcism, call it what you will. They were a farewell. I knew, or thought I knew, that I was about to betray my former self and plunge into a world of good behaviour, of diligently completed homework, punctual attendance and female dating. A tangle of briar might as well persuade itself that tomorrow it will become a neat line of tulips, but I had thought it was my destiny. At the same time I knew, absolutely knew that there was some quality in me, foul, ungovernable, unmanageable and unendurable as I was, that was right. The perception of nature, the depth of emotion, the brightness and intensity of every moment, I knew these faded with age and I hated myself in advance for that. I wanted to live on the

182 same quick Keatsian pulse for all time. Perhaps Pope was right to suggest that a little learning is a dangerous thing, for it may be that had I read much, but I had not read all: I had read enough to connect my experience with that of others, but I had not read enough to trust the experience of others. So when, for example, Robin Maugham in his auto- biography Escape From the Shadows wrote of his schoolboy loves and passions and his hatred for his father and his relationship with his famous uncle and his desperation to find a role for himself in an alien world, I connected with that, but when Maugham reached his twenties, became a writer of sorts, fought in tanks in the desert war, and then looked back at the ‘Shadows’ from which he had gratefully escaped, I thought him a traitor. He should have stayed and fought, not just in England, but in the republic of adolescence. He should not have committed the crime of growing up. I prefigured in my mind my future self being just so treacherous and it appalled me and angered me. The only ‘work’ and I use the word ill-advisedly, which I can give you a few lines from is an epic poem I began that summer, an epic in which I grandly decided to ape the structure and ironic style of Byron’s masterpiece Don Juan, which involved grappling with the complexities of ottava nina which, as you shall see, is a verse form which I did not do any justice at all. It suited Byron well, but then Byron was Byron; Auden excelled at it, but then Auden mastered all verse forms. I... well, I floundered. The Untitled Epic (that, I grieve to confess, is its title) which I have just reread completely for the first time since writing it, much to my great embarrassment, seems to be much more directly autobiographical than I had remembered it to be. The scene I will inflict on you is the poetic version I attempted of that red-headed Derwent’s ravishing of me. I call him Richard Jones in this instance and make him House-captain. As Isherwood was to do in Christ op her And His Kind I refer to myself in this epic as ‘Fry’, ‘Stephen’ and occasionally, like Byron, ‘our hero. We are at verse fifty something by now, I had planned twelve Cantos, each of a hundred verses. Richard Jones has sent Fry down to his study ostensibly to punish him for being in bed late. Fry waits outside the door in his dressing-gown and pyjamas, hoping he isn’t going to be beaten too badly. I apologise for the completely show-offy and senseless semi-quotations from everything from Anthony and Cleopatra to The Burial Of Sir John Moore at Corunna. The painful polysyllabalism of some line-endings was in deference to Byron’s much more successful comic use of hudibrastic rhyming. I was fifteen, it’s my only excuse. He stood outside the Captain’s study door, And prayed to God to toughen his backside Against the strokes of Jones’s rod of war. For hours he waited, rubbing that soft hide In fear. He kicked the wainscot and tapped the floor, Examined the plaster on the wall, eyed The ants that weaved around the broken flags And cursed the day that God invented fags. At last, as he began to think that Jones Would never come, he heard the crack of steel- Capped heels around the corner. He froze And felt within his veins the blood congeal To ice. The boots were sparking on the stones, So in the darkening passage the only real Sound, rang in deaf’ning pentametric beat In flashes from the pounding leathered feet.





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




183 The Captain halted and threw wide the door: Inside his study glared the gleaming trophies The rackets, balls and instruments of war, Sops to culture — some unread Brigid Brophies And Heinrich Bölls. All these our hero saw, And Deco posters for Colmans and Hovis. But above the window, sleekly like a ship, Lay harboured there a deadly raw-hide whip. But Richard Jones, it appears, is not going to inflict punishment. He tells our hero to calm down. This is going to be a brotherly chat. “I take it you drink coffee? Good. And cake? That’s it, relax! Now look, Stephen — I may Call you that? — I’m not here just so’s to make Your life hell, you know. If, in any way, I can help you to settle down and take Your place at Brookfields House, then you must say. As for your being late for bed — it’s quite Okay, for you’ll be later still tonight.” Those blue, blue eyes to Stephen now appeared Fraternal, not so Hitleresquely bad, And all those fearful doubts at last were cleared. Those eyes that gazed so picturesquely had, When he misjudged him, been loathed and feared: Fry saw him by the little desk he had The tea-cups on, affectionate and kind, The best-intentioned prefect one could find. There follows a bit of coffee spilling business which means they have to share the same chair. Richard gives Stephen a cigarette, which makes him choke and splutter and go dizzy... And meanwhile Richard gently rocked the chair They sat in (like a tarnished throne) and gazed At Stephen, softly, as he gasped for air, His mind befogged, his body numbed and dazed. But Richard only saw the glowing hair And soft and hairless skin. He was amazed That such a vision could assail his eyes, From satin locks to silk-pyjama-ed thighs. He stretched his arms towards our hero’s head: “What hair you have...” he whispered, “may I stroke it?” ‘How lovely,’ Stephen thought, “Yes please,” he said. A blissful silence fell, and Stephen broke it, “If only — “ he stopped, turning red. “I know, I know,” breathed Richard. As he spoke it He swung one leg over the other side, And, straddling the two arms, he faced his bride. I will excuse you the pain of the actual scene, but there follows what we might call an Act of Carnal Violation, ruthlessly enacted by Jones on Fry, who is deeply hurt by the experience. He picked himself up and hobbled about: He dressed in silence choking back the tears.

184 He carried inside him the seeds of doubt That had exchanged his new-fired hopes for fears So Jones had hurt him after all, and out Of joy and smiles there came forth grief and leers. Passions to passions, lust to lust shall pass: Life’s a bugger and a pain in the arse. Not a word was passed not a parting shot, As Fry to his dormitory hurried. He hit the mattress of his iron cot And his face in his pillow he buried. “He’s used me like you’d use a woman, not A friend,” said Fry, hot and hurt and worried. Thus was this boy, now sadly laid in bed, Quite robbed of comfort, sleep and maidenhead. I have to confess that it upsets me that extract (literary shame aside): upsets me because it seems to indicate that I had been more devastated by my deflowering at the hands (hands? — hardly the right word) of Derwent than I had supposed. There again, reading further on, I think it possible that dramatic and poetic licence were laying the ground for more tender, lyrical scenes that follow with the arrival of the Matthew of the poem. The Don Juan form and tone, although unrealised and clumsily done was probably the right choice, for Byron depends hugely on undercutting emotion and lyricism with bathos, polysyllabic rhyming and ironic juxtapositions of the grandiose with the banal. Since for me Matthew was a literal and living ideal, this comic style stopped me from descending into too much self-pity and idealising what was to my mind already ideal, lyricising what was already lyrical and poeticising what was already poetic: it allowed me some kind of objectivity. The odd thing, and I suppose I ought to be ashamed to admit it, is that I am not sure that I could now write anything close to those verses, doggerel as they are. I wouldn’t try, of course, my embarrassment glands would explode. Which is precisely what my fifteen- year-old self dreaded and predicted would become of me. Whatever the literary defects of the poem it serves now to remind me just how completely my mind, soul and being had stayed behind at Uppingham, not just during that summer following my expulsion from Fircroft and then from The Paston School, but later on too. For I retyped and amended this poem a year afterwards (changing Stephen to David throughout) and continued to work on it until I was eighteen. My only contact with Uppingham was with Jo Wood, who proved an amusing correspondent. I had, at one point towards the end, blurted out to him my passion for Matthew. I think I had been desperate to show someone, anyone, a section of a team photograph I had managed to steal, cutting Matthew’s face into an oval and clamping it into my wallet like a schoolgirl’s pressed flower. Jo had grunted sympathetically, he had never been attracted in a boyward direction, but he was good-hearted and perceptive enough to glimpse the sincerity of my passion behind the loose, self-indulgent wank of my rhetoric. Jo’s return to Uppingham had gone serenely and he was heading towards A levels and Cambridge, continuing, as always to read and read and read. Occasionally in his letters he would slip Matthew’s name into some piece of news, carefully and without emphasis: I wonder if he knew that just the sight of the name written out still made my heart leap within me?

185 My first year at Norcat was spent in digs, with an elderly couple called (you’ll have to take my word for it) Croote. Mr and Mrs Croote ‘took in’ students once a year. There was one bedroom with two beds. I shared with a boy called Ian from Kelling, near Holt, whose passion was motorcycles. Just as I was drifting off to sleep he would awaken me with an excited cry of ‘Kawa 750!’ as a distant engine note drifted through the night. Mrs Croote had three passions: the strings of Mantovani, her Chihuahua, Pepe, and natural history programmes. Each night that Mantovani’s orchestra appeared (they had a regular BBCZ slot at this time) she would tell me solemnly that every member of his orchestra was good enough to be a concert soloist in his own right and I would say, ‘Gosh,’ and nudge Ian, who would say ‘Golly!’ and I would add, ‘Goes to show,’ and Ian would say, ‘It does, doesn’t it?’ and Mrs Croote would be satisfied. When a wildlife programme was on we would wait with baited breath until the moment Mrs Croote would turn to us and say, at the sight of a dung beetle rolling dung up-hill, a lemur feeding its young or an orchid attracting a fly, ‘Isn’t nature wonderful, though?’ We would nod vigorously and she would say, ‘No, but isn’t it, though?’ I never quite understood the ‘though’. It is hard to parse. I suppose it serves the office of what the Germans call a flick word. It does something to the sentence, but it is hard to tell precisely what. I do know that Mrs Croote could no more say, ‘Isn’t nature wonderful?’ without adding a ‘though’ on the end than Tony Blair, bless him, could reply to a journalistic question without prefacing his answer with the word ‘Look’. Mr Croote’s twin passions were a bright red Robin Reliant and the King’s Lynn Speedway team, which allowed him and Ian to talk about motorcycles a great deal, while I made appreciative noises about Mrs Croote’s cooking, which was unspeakable. Norcat itself hovered between the status of school and university very successfully. They had good teaching staff in the English, French and History of Art departments, but as well as A level courses they offered a large number of ‘sandwich courses’ and ‘day release’ courses for those learning trades in catering and engineering and so forth. The social mix was something I had never encountered before. I found there to be no difficulty with the differences of background, I was accepted by everyone there without any of the inverted snobbery I had dreaded. The place was also, it must be pointed out, full of girls. Two girls, Judith and Gillian, I made friends with very quickly. Judith adored Gilbert O’Sullivan and wanted to be a novelist: she had already created a Danielle Steele, Jackie Collins type heroine called Castella, and would give us excerpts of work in progress. Together we pooled resources to buy Terry Jacks’s ‘Seasons in the Sun’ which one-off single smote us both deeply. I think Judith might have suspected my sexuality, for she was the kind of naturally simpatica, thickly red-haired girl who makes a natural confidante for gay men. Gillian, on the other hand, for a short time became a girlfriend of mine, and there were disco moments of ensnogglement and bra-fumbling which came to very little. It was in King’s Lynn that I swam into the orbit of a most extraordinary circle of intellectuals who met regularly in the bar of a small hotel and discussed avidly the works of Frederick Rolfe, the infamous Baron Corvo. The very fact that I had heard of him made me welcome in the circle. These men and women, who were led by a bespectacled fellow called Chris and a glamorously half-French Baron called Paul, held regular Paradox Parties. Instead of a password or a bottle, the only way to gain entry to such a party was to offer at the door a completely original paradox. Paul, whose father was the French

186 honorary consul (for King’s Lynn is a port), could play the piano excellently, specialising in outré composers like Alkan and Sorabji, although he was also capable of delighting me with Wolf and Schubert Lieder. He was planning, like Corvo, to become a Roman priest. Also like Corvo, he failed in his attempt, unlike Corvo however he did not descend into bitterness and resentment but became finally an Anglican priest, which suited him better, despite his ancestry. He died unpleasantly many years later in his London parish. This group regularly produced a magazine called The Failiure Press (the spelling is deliberate) to which I contributed a regular crossword. A deal of The Failiure Press was written in the New Model Alphabet, which would take up far too much space for me to explain, but which nearly always looked like this ‘phaij phajboo ajbo jjjbo’ and took a great deal of deciphering to the initiated. The rest was filled with Corvine material (relating to the works of Corvo) and latterly, after I had long since moved on, it plunged into a weird libertarian frenzy of polemical anti-Semitism, gall and bitterness: the title had ever been a hostage to fortune or self-fulfilling prophecy. In its early days it was light-hearted, occasionally amusing, and always self-consciously intellectual. In a town like King’s Lynn, such spirits were rare and it was amongst this group that I found my temporary best friend, and indeed first and only real girlfriend, whom I will call Kathleen Waters, to spare blushes all round. Kathleen was in many of the same lecture sets as I, and she had the advantage of having her parents’ house just across the road from college. We would spend a lot of time there, playing records and talking. She had entered the phase of smoking Sobranie cigarettes, using green and black nail polish, wearing fringey silks and delighting in that strange mixture of the Bloomsbury and the pre-Raphaelite which characterises a certain kind of girl with artistic temperament and nowhere to put it. For my sixteenth birthday she gave me a beautiful green and gold 1945 edition of Oscar Wilde’s Intentions, which I have to this day, and a damned good fuck, the memory of which is also with me still. We were up in her room, listening to Don Maclean’s American Pie, as one did in those days, marvelling at the poetry of ‘Vincent’ and how it spoke us, when she remarked that it was odd that we had never screwed. I had told her early on that I was probably homosexual, but she did not see this as any kind of impediment at all. It was a perfectly satisfactory experience. It was not as I had imagined from that horribly misogynistic scene in Ken Russell’s The Music Lovers which seemed to suggest that because Tchaikovsky was attracted to men he must also have vomited at the touch of women. I could not, afterwards, deny that the design features of the vagina, so far as texture and enclosing elasticity were concerned, seemed absolutely made for the job — ideally suited in fact. We remained friends and tried it again once or twice, in a field and in a car. My heart was never in it, but my loins were very grateful indeed for the outing and the exercise. The summer after my first year at Lynn I earned enough as a barman at the Castle Hotel (sixteen years old, but what the hell, they didn’t ask questions in those days) to buy a Raleigh Ultramatic Moped, which I now used to shuttle me the weekly thirty-something miles between Booton and King’s Lynn. For my second year I bade farewell to the Crootes, Pepe and Mantovani and took up accommodation in a hostel in college. I had two very good friends there, Philip Sutton and Dale Martin, both highly entertaining, charming, funny and resourceful. I must confess too that Dale was almost my first betrayal of Matthew for I found him terrifically cute. He looked like a seventeen-year-old

187 Brad Pitt, which surely no one will deny is a wholly acceptable appearance to present. Matthew still burned a hole in my heart, but Dale was most comely to look upon. We lived on the top floor of the hostel which had a kitchenette, and Phil and Dale patiently taught me over many weeks how to fry eggs and heat up baked beans, a skill I retain to this day to the sick envy and admiration of my friends. Both Phil and Dale were Norfolk down to their socks, but again they forgave me my background and treated me as one of them. Our idea of a really, really, really good time was to spend hour upon hour in a back parlour of The Woolpack, the pub next door to the college, playing three-card brag for money. Not huge sums, but enough to annoy us if we kept losing. I wasn’t in the least interested in alcohol and usually drank long pints of bitter lemon and orange juice, a St Clements I think the drink is called. I discovered that I absolutely loved the company of completely heterosexual men, where the conversation ranged endlessly between sport, jokes, pop-music and the card game. There was a reluctance to talk openly of women, not out of shyness but I think out of the same graceful good manners that is more stuffily enshrined amongst the smarter classes in all those College sconcing rules and admonitions never to ‘bandy a woman’s name’. Phil and Dale got me a job at Christmas as a waiter at the Hotel de Paris in Cromer. In a week I earned a hundred pounds, and by Christ I earned it. I think I must have walked two hundred miles between kitchen and restaurant, silver-serving from breakfast to late, late, dinner. The money was spent on cannabis, cigarettes and still (I blush to confess) sweets. I had been elected in my second year at Norcat on to the committee of the Student’s Union. I came upon this clipping the other day which I had proudly cut from the pages of the Lynn News & Advertiser. West Norfolk not to ban ‘Exorcist’ Members of the environmental health committee of West Norfolk District Council exercised their powers as film censors for the first time on Wednesday. They watched the controversial film “The Exorcist,” and then approved it. The committee members attended a private showing of the two-hour film at the Majestic Cinema, King’s Lynn, to decide whether they were prepared to accept the recommended certification of the British Board of Film Censors. COMPLAINTS At a committee meeting afterwards the committee agreed that the film which has an X certificate, could be shown in West Norfolk. Since April the committee has had the power to prevent cinema licensees from showing a film. “The Exorcist” was the first film they had viewed and they did so after receiving three complaints about it. Three co-opted members of the committee also saw the film — Canon Denis Rutt, vicar of St Margaret’s Church, Dr M. D. O’Brien, a Consultant Psychiatrist at Lynn Hospital, and Stephen Fry, representing the Student’s Union. Canon Rutt said he saw no reason why the film should be banned on ethical grounds. Dr O’Brien said: “It is a film which would worry susceptible people — but you cannot protect the susceptible. A proportion of hysterical girls will faint and be carried

188 out but it will not kill them. Presumably they want the thrill of being frightened and I would not regard this as serious. Mr Fry said: “Far from being disturbing, it made me more appreciative of goodness, I am not in favour of even considering banning it.” But committee chairman Mr H. K. Rose who did not vote, disagreed with their views. “I would have thought it was very offensive to the good taste of many people, I was horrified, but I am obviously in the minority. CRITERIA “If we approve of a film like this I see no point in having any censorship at all. If people are titillated it makes them go and see something to see if we are right or wrong,” Mr Rose said. Canon Rutt commented: “This whole operation is giving the film the wrong sort of publicity.” The committee’s decision is based on the question of whether the film is offensive, is against good taste and decency and whether it could lead to crime or disorder. With its X certificate the film can only be seen by adults. Still a self-righteous little prig. I must have been jeeyust seventeen when I was co-opted on to this committee. Why they felt a seventeen-year-old would make a good judge of a film which was legally available only to those aged eighteen and upwards, I have no idea. My role on the Students’ Union was Officer in charge of Films. This was in the days before video cassettes and it was my job to order reels of film from Rank and show them in the assembly hall of the college. I suppose that’s why I was chosen to represent the students for the Great Exorcist Debate. I remember the screening well. I had already managed to see the film twice before in London, so it hardly came as a surprise. The expression on Councillor H. K. Rose’s face when the possessed child played by Linda Blair growled to the priest in a voice like a cappuccino machine running dry, ‘Your mother sucks cocks in hell, Karras,’ was wonderful to behold. His hand was still shaking as he dunked ginger nuts into his coffee in the committee room for the discussion afterwards, poor old buster. What he would have made of Crash or Reservoir Dogs one can only guess at... At this time at King’s Lynn I began to dress, in accordance with the latest vogue, in suits with very baggy trousers, their cut inspired by the Robert Redford version of The Great Gatsby which had just been released. I wore stiff detachable collars and silk ties, well-polished shoes and, occasionally, a hat of some description. I must have looked like a cross between James Caan in The Godfather and a poovey Chelsea sipper of crème de menthe and snapper up of unconsidered rent. Drama was taken care of at Norcat by a talented enthusiast called Robert Pols. He cast me as Lysander in A Midsummer Night’s Dream and Creon m a double bill of Sophocles’ Oedipus and Antigone. Somewhere inside of me, I was still certain that I was going to be an actor. My mother used to explain to me that really I wanted to be a barrister, which, as she pointed out, is much the same thing and I had played along with this idea. In my heart of hearts however, and in hers too I suspect, it was acting that mattered. My writing I considered infinitely more important, but so private as to be

189 impossible to show or publish. I thought that acting was simple showing off and that writing was a private basin in which one could wash one’s sins away. It is strange that although I spent two whole academic years at Norcat my memories of it are so much more vague than my memories of Uppingham at which I spent only a month or so longer. By that second year at King’s Lynn I reached a terrible low. I was seventeen now, no longer anything like the youngest in my class, no longer the fast stream clever boy, no longer the complex but amusing rogue, no longer the sly yet fascinating villain, no longer in some people’s eyes excusable through adolescence. Seventeen is as good as grown up. Everything and everyone I cared about was growing away from me. Jo Wood was bound for Cambridge, Matthew would be trying for there the following year. Richard Fawcett was going up to St Andrews, my brother was going to an officer's training course in the Army. I was a failure and I knew it. Some argument with my father in the holidays between the fifth and sixth and final terms at Norcat resulted in an attempt at suicide. I cannot recall the reason for the argument, but I determined absolutely that it was the end of everything. I had nothing to get up for in the morning, nothing at all. Besides, what pleasure, what exquisite, shivering delight, to picture my father’s devastation when my body was discovered and he and everyone would know that it was his fault. I took a huge selection of pills, principally Paracetamol but also Intal. Intal was an encapsulated powder that was supposed to be ‘spinhaled’ into the lungs to help prevent asthma. I reckoned the devastating admixture of those two, with a little aspirin and codeine thrown in, would do the job. I can’t remember if I wrote a note or not, knowing me I must have done, a note filled with hatred and blame and self-righteous misery. If ever I have been a total prick, a loveless, unlovable prick in my life, this was the time. I was horrid to look upon, to listen to, to know. I didn’t wash, I didn’t take interest in others, I was argumentative with the two people who were most unconditionally prepared to show me their love — my mother and my sister, crushing their every enthusiasm with cynicism, arrogance and pride; I was rude and insulting to my brother, to everyone around me. I was the cunt of the world, filled with self-loathing and world- loathing. I missed Matthew, I wanted him and I knew he had gone. He had literally gone, that was the Pelion on Ossa, madness on madness that tipped me over the edge. My Matthew had disappeared, Matteo was no more. I saw a photograph of him in a school magazine in Roger’s bedroom. Matthew’s face in a cricket photograph, a hockey photograph and a photograph taken from the school play. Three pieces of evidence to prove irrefutably that he had gone. The features had coarsened, he had grown in height and build and stockiness. He was now descending from the peak which, while I had known him he had always still miraculously been making towards. Maybe that late afternoon in the field outside the Middle, in his cricket whites, rolling and panting and fiercely jerking with me. Maybe that had been the summit. For us both. Now the only Matthew who really existed, existed in my mind. Which left me nothing, nothing but a burst wound of bitterness, disappointment and hatred and a deep, deep sickness with myself and the world. Any argument on any subject with my father, therefore, could have caused me to

190 make this geste fou. Anything from a refusal on my part to pump up the water when it was my turn, to a solemn talk about ‘attitude’. Choking with dry tears and raging, raging, raging at the absolute indifference of nature and the world to the death of love, the death of hope and the death of beauty, I remember sitting on the end of my bed, collecting these pills and capsules together and wondering why, why when I felt I had so much to offer, so much love, such outpourings of love and energy to spend on the world, I was incapable of being offered love, giving it or summoning the energy with which I knew I could transform myself and everything around me. ‘If they only knew!’ I screamed inside. ‘If they only knew what I have within me. How much I can pour out, how much I have to say, how much I have inside. If they only knew!’ I used many times to touch my own chest and feel, under its asthmatic quiver, the engine of the heart and lungs and blood and feel amazed at what I sensed was the enormity of the power I possessed. Not magical power, not all that Carrie teenage telekinetic wank, but real power. The power simply to go on, the power to endure, that is power enough, but I felt I had also the power to create, to add, to delight, to amaze and to transform. Yet I was unwanted, rejected and unthought of. My mother, yes, she believed in me, but everybody’s mother believes in them. No one else believed in me. Principally of course — oh how one sees that now —myself. Principally, I did not believe in me. I believed m ghosts more than I believed in me, and take my word for it, I never believed in ghosts, I’m far too spiritual and emotional and passionate to believe in the supernatural. I did have a friend. One friend. He was the local rector: he looked, oddly enough, exactly like Karras in The Exorcist, but his own life was so emotionally difficult and his own struggles with faith, family and identity so intense that it was, in his case, a question of Physician, heal thyself. He did me good by asking me to teach his daughters maths, which was psychologically smart and very touching. He knew maths had come hard for me and he knew too that there was a teacher in me raging to get out. He nearly tipped me (certainly not by trying to, he was no evangelist) into religion and I had made a quiet visit to the Bishop of Lynn, God’s representative in Norfolk of a mysterious body called ACM, the church’s vocational testing instrument, which accepted or declined applicants for ordination. We talked awhile, this Bishop, Aubrey Aitken, and I and he had given it as his booming opinion that I should wait awhile until God’s Grace became clearer to me. He boomed because he had no larynx and spoke by means of one of those boxes that Jack Hawkins was forced to use towards the end of his life. The ceremony of ‘switching the Bishop on’ when Aitken came to preach was an accepted addition to local services within the diocese. The Bishop was right of course, I had no vocation at all, merely the kind of vanity of a Henry Crawford in Mansfield Park, the vanity that made me think I would make a better preacher, a more stylish preacher than the kind of soggy, incoherent priest that was beginning to proliferate all over England. I knew I couldn’t believe in God because I was fundamentally Hellenic in my outlook. That is the grand way of putting it, I was also absolutely convinced, if I want to put it more petulantly, that if there was a God his caprice, malice, arbitrariness and sheer lack of taste made him repulsive to me. There was a time when he had on his team people like Bach, Mozart, Michelangelo, Leonardo,

191 Raphael, Laud, Donne, Herbert, Swift and Wren: now he had awful, drippy wet smacks with no style, no wit, no articulacy and no majesty. There was as much glory in the average Anglican priest as you would find in a British Home Stores cardigan. Of course what I didn’t know was that — looked at in the right way — there is as much glory in a British Homes Stores cardigan as can be found in St Peter’s, Rome, the Grand Canyon and the whole galaxy itself, but that is because I looked at nothing in the right way. When I had first caught sight of Matthew I saw the beauty in everything. Now I saw only ugliness and decay. All beauty was in the past. Again and again I wrote in poems, in notes, on scraps of paper. My whole life stretched out gloriously behind me. If I wrote that sick phrase once, I wrote it fifty times. And believed it too. In a phase from Dirty Harry, I had been flopped lower than whaleshit. I was at the bottom with no way up. If Ronnie Rutter saw me now, what would he think? His school reports had been generous, but there had been a kernel of truth in that word, whatever my woes at Uppingham, that word he used, ‘exuberant’. Exuberance now was something gone from me for ever, something I could never recapture. Which brings us back to the heap of pills and capsules and the glass of water. With one last vile and violent curse against the world, the world that had turned back into a rotting mole, an uncaring cycle of meaningless, wearisome repetition and decay, I swallowed them all, turned out the light and fell asleep. I awoke in a flickering strip-lit world of whiteness and to a grotesque pain in my throat and cheeks. A tube was being forced down me, while a nurse slapped my cheeks and repeated and repeated and repeated: ‘Stephen! Stephen! Come on, Stephen! Come on. Stephen, Stephen! Stephen! Stephen! Come on now. Try! Come on. Come on. Stephen!’ It seems that at about midnight my brother had been awoken by the noise of my vomiting. When he entered the room he saw me arc a huge spray that he swears reached the ceiling. The ceiling in my bedroom was very high. I remember nothing of this, no ambulance rides, nothing. Nothing between switching out the bedside lamp and the sudden indignity of rebirth: the slaps, the brightness, the tubing, the speed, the urgent insistence that I be choked back into breathing life. I have felt so sorry for babies ever since. It seems that the very mixture that I had thought would truly put an end to me was what saved me. I have given up puzzling over whether I subconsciously knew that or not. I am just grateful to the luck, the subliminal judgement (if there was any), the care of the gods, the sharp ears of my dear brother and the skill and ceaseless implacability of the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital nurses and doctors. Little was said about it all at home. There was little to say. One of the men who worked for my father, who had worked for him since Chesham days, stopped me two days later and gave me the most vicious ticking off I had ever been given in my life. He was a frighteningly strong man called Tyler, who looked like a weather-beaten Malayan planter and whom I suspected of extreme right-wing politics (probably on account of his Mosley moustache): whether he thought he was doing psychologically the right thing or

192 not I have no idea. The burden of his tirade was the worry that I caused my poor mother and my poor father. Had I any idea? ‘Did I make them unhappy?’ I asked. ‘Of course you did, you young bastard,’ he snapped. ‘Unhappy enough to end their own lives?’ ‘No,’ he called after me as I fled, ‘because they’ve got more guts.’ I think my father may have guessed that love was at the root of this, for I remember him coming up to my room (for almost the first time in his life) and telling me some complicated story about how he had consulted a tarot reader who had said that I was unhappy in love. I believe this was his way of indirectly indicating that he was ready to listen to anything I had to say. I had nothing to say of course. Maybe I’ve made this memory up. Tarot and my father don’t seem to go together. I can’t think what all the stampings and yellings and sobbings must have done for my poor sister Jo. We don’t talk often about this time, except with rueful smiles and raised eyebrows. How grateful my parents must have been when it was time for me to go back to Lynn for my last term, my A level term. Grateful that I was out of the way, for all that they knew it was a pointless exercise, my returning. They knew, they knew that I was all played out. Between the three-card brag at The Woolpack, life and more pinball in the Students’ Union, the Paradox Parties, Kathleen and my own misery, I had given up any pretence of academic work. Towards the end of my second year it had become apparent to me and to everyone else that I would fail everything. I cannot recall my mental state, by ‘recall’ I mean just that, I cannot summon it up into me, the way I can so exactly feel again the earlier emotions that led up to the pitiful suicide attempt. I have memories of Kathleen and the Corvo set, I have memories of Phil and Dale and cards, I have memories of organising films to show for the Film Society. I have memories of trying to dance to Slade and Elton John at Union discos. I remember the unknown band Judas Priest coming to give a concert. I remember the little acting I did. The greatest educational stimulation at this time, oddly, seemed to come from History of Art. I became obsessed in particular with architecture, the Greek orders, the Gothic orders, Michelangelo, and then the English House, the Gothic revival and the Victorians. My bible was Bannister Fletcher and my God was Inigo Jones. I am ashamed to say I cannot even remember what texts were set for English or for French. Hold up ... for French it was Anouilh’s Antigone again. That’s it, I fear, that’s the sum of my memories of King’s Lynn in my second year there. I sat the A levels — most of them, ducking out of the final papers of French and English. Fear of failure again: ‘Of course I failed! I didn’t even bloody turn up!’ And then, in the phoney period of awaiting results that we all knew would be disastrous, the stealing began again in greater earnest. My mother had been used to the raids on her handbag, God knows how she could bring herself to look at me sometimes, and I felt sick myself then, not as sick as I feel now, but sick all the same. I was still stuck at home, knowing that by the end of August, my eighteenth birthday, I would be without A levels, without friends, without purpose, without anything but the prospect of a winding down into permanent failure and lost opportunity. I had started, in

193 King’s Lynn, occasionally visiting the public lavatories, cottages as they are known in the gay world, and I saw a future for myself, at best, as an assistant librarian in a mouldy town somewhere, occasionally getting a blow job in a public bog. Arrested once or twice every four or five years and ending up with my head in an oven. Not so uncommon a fate in those days, or today. Life, that can shower you with so much splendour, is unremittingly cruel to those who have given up. Thank the gods there is such a thing as redemption, the redemption that comes in the form of other people the moment you are prepared to believe that they exist. I remember an episode of Star Trek that ends with Jim turning to McCoy and saying, ‘Out there, Bones, someone is saying the three most beautiful words in the galaxy.’ I fully expected the nauseous obviousness of ‘I love you’. But Kirk turned to the screen, gazed at the stars and whispered: ‘Please, help me.’ Strange, the potency of cheap television. I had no concept of such a thing as seeking help. I had successfully signed up on the dole, to the distressed resignation of my parents, and I headed, that July, with my Giro cheque to King’s Lynn. for one last Paradox Party, which would be followed by my meeting up with Jo Wood for a camping holiday in Devon. When I next returned to Booton, it would be as a convicted felon. 2 One of the most shameful of many shameful acts that were to follow was the theft of pension money from the handbag of the grandmother of the young man who was hosting the Paradox Party. There are few crimes lower and nothing I write in this paragraph will mitigate, deaden or palliate the pain and fury it must have caused that family. I caught a train to Devon, arranged some humiliating business to do with Giro cheque forwarding by telephone with my mother and wandered with Jo Wood around Chagford and other beauty spots until it was time for Jo to go home to Sutton Coldfield. I accompanied him there. The next two months were to see me moving around the country searching for some element of my past that might give me a clue as to my future. That is a very strange way to describe what happened. A very strange way to describe it indeed. But it is true, for over the next two months I found myself making my way towards Chesham, desperate to see a town again that I barely remembered, a town that I had not seen since I was seven years old, but which pulled me like a magnet. I went to Yorkshire and stayed with Richard Fawcett’s family. I went to Uley and saw Sister Pinder and the Angus girls and Cloud the pony, still alive, her grey milky belly now all but brushing the ground. I made my way to the Reading rock festival because I had heard a rumour that Matthew might be there. I knew Matthew wasn’t the same Matthew, the real Matthew, but I wanted to search for the traces and I wanted perhaps at last to tell him, to let it all go. A less strange way to describe what happened is to report that I went about Britain stealing, stealing, stealing and stealing until the police caught up with me. Jo’s place was in Sutton Coldfield where he lived with his mother, sister and two

194 brothers. I stole some money from the hosts of a drinks party I had been invited along to and headed to Sheffield, where I stayed a while with Richard Fawcett and his parents. They were kind to me: Richard and I chatted and caught up with each other, but my feet were itching, the desire to return had gripped me, I wanted to go right back, right back to the beginning. I don’t believe that I stole from the Fawcetts, but maybe I did. My next destination was Chesham and the Brookes and Popplewells. Amanda Brooke, Florence Nightingale yellow, lambswool V-neck and straight brunette cut had been my girlfriend when we were five and six. The Popplewells were a family of four boys, all of whom were horrifyingly good at cricket and everything else. At Christmas the Popplewells traditionally sent, instead of cards, general letters that delineated their sons’ enviable records of shining academic and athletic distinction — ‘Alexander has won a scholarship to Charterhouse, Andrew achieved Grade 7 in the viola, Nigel had a successful trial for Hampshire Seconds, Eddie-Jim’s prep-school composition “What I Did In The Holidays” has been short listed for the Booker Prize ...‘ that kind of thing. Our family, in moments of rare collective ‘humour would wryly compose the equivalents that the Fry family might send: ‘Stephen has been expelled from his third school and continues to lie and steal. Jo has defiantly smeared mascara all over her ten-year old eyelashes and looks a mess, Roger’s CO describes him as too considerate and pleasant to make a successful career officer. The house temperature has now plummeted below anything an Eskimo would tolerate.’ We knew that the Popplewell Christmas Letter was never designed to crow or gloat, but its effect on us was none the less that of lemon on a paper-cut. Margaret, to whom I owe an eternal debt of gratitude for presenting me with my first Wodehouse book, had been at school with my mother. Her husband Oliver, a team- member along with Peter May and Jim Prior of the Charterhouse XI immortalised by Simon Raven, won his Blue at Cambridge and then turned to the law. He kept in touch with the cricket establishment however and only last year completed a two-year term as President of the MCC: he now judges away full-time in the law courts. One of the greatest regrets of my life was to turn down his offer to put me up for MCC membership. I don’t know why I declined, a kind of embarrassment I suppose. Two years later I changed my mind but by then the waiting list had gone supernova and the opportunity was lost. Whether coaching me in cricket as a tiny tot along with his sons, or later as a skipper trying to teach me the rudiments of sailing, he always presented the image of a bluff, Hawk’s Club, won’t-put-up-with-any-of-this-intellectual-nonsense hearty, which belied a deep intelligence and very real sensitivity — as we shall see. The oldest son Nigel, closest in age to me, was also to become a Cambridge Blue, double Blue in fact, and went on to play for Somerset, in the cup-winning side that included Ian Botham, Joel Garner and Viv Richards. He too is now a lawyer. My mother tells me that, aged five, I once returned from an afternoon in the Popplewell garden, bowling and batting and fielding and said to her, ‘Mummy, are you allowed to choose your husband?’ ‘Why of course, darling.’ ‘Do you mean you picked Daddy when you could have chosen Mr Popplewell!’ I exclaimed in outrage and disgust. For years the Popplewells symbolised to me everything that was successful, integrated and marked down by the gods for effortless achievement. What is more, they were impossible to dislike: they proved to me that it was feasible to

195 conform and to excel without losing integrity, honour, charm or modesty. I had always believed that my father, with his irksomely onerous integrity and pathologically intense distaste for worldly rewards could have been like them if only he hadn’t escaped to the remote defensive fastness of rural Norfolk. Maybe I believed that the failures I associated with Booton and with Uppingham could be wiped out by this return to Chesham. If I had not been taken from Chesham to Norfolk in the first place, I could have been a glowing success like the Brookes and the Popplewells, I would automatically have joined in. I would have grown up healthy, sensible, talented, law-abiding and decent, instead of being transformed into the mess of madnesses that I had become. I don’t know if that is what I thought, but the Brookes and Popplewells were immensely kind and welcoming, either swallowing the story that I was just holidaying around England before A level results and university or tactfully choosing not to probe. The Popplewells had two of the Australian test side staying with them, Ross Edwards and Ashley Mallet, whom I met in a lather of dripping excitement: cricket by now had entered my soul for keeps. Ashley Mallett told me something that I did not want to believe, something that troubled me deeply. He told me that professional cricket was ultimately hell, because the pain of losing a match was more intense than the joy of winning one. Edwards disagreed with him, but Mallett stuck fast to his belief. It was, I see now, simply a personal difference of outlook between the two of them, but to me it was fundamental. One of them must be right and the other must be wrong. Was the pain of failing a deeper feeling than the joy of success? If so, Robert Browning and Andrea del Sarto were wrong: a man’s reach exceeding his grasp did not justify heaven, it vindicated hell. After a week or so of cheerful, tumbling, merriness in the Brooke household I left, brimming with charm and gratitude. I took with me Patrick Brooke’s Diner’s Club card and the insanity really took hold. In those days any credit card purchase under the value of fifty pounds was a simple matter of signature and a roller machine. There was no swiping and instant computer connection. I took some self-justifying comfort in the thought that as soon as the loss of the card was reported Mr Brooke’s account would not be debited, only that of Diner’s Club Inc. But what does that mean? I had stolen from a pensioner s handbag and from anyone who had money, I can’t claim that the smallest scrap of decency, altruism or respect lay behind any of my actions. The next few weeks passed in a kind of cacophoric, if there is such a word, buzz — which is to say a state of joylessly euphoric wildness, what a psychiatrist would call the upswing of manic depression or bipolar cyclothymia or however they choose to designate it now. The functional opposite, in other words, of the listless misery that had caused me to scoop up a suicidal bowlful of pills a few months earlier. I know that I went to London and transferred my possessions, such as they were (books mostly) from my rolled up sleeping bag to a brand-new suitcase. I stayed for a while in the Imperial Hotel in Russell Square, applied for a job as a reader of talking books for the blind and made regular visits to the American Bar of the Ritz Hotel where I had become friends with the barman, Ron, whose passion was renaissance painting. He could remember P. G. Wodehouse sipping a cocktail in the corner, and F. Scott Fitzgerald leaping over the bar, drunk as a skunk, snatching up a bottle of whisky that he brandished like a woodman’s axe, all kinds of juicy and wondrous moments. But these were as nothing to Ron when compared to a

196 Duccio or a Donatello. He would show me slides of Mantegnas and Correggios and of Masaccio and Giotto fresco cycles that he kept under the bar, light-box and all, and speak to me of the great book in his life, the greatest book about art ever written he told me, Reitlinger’s The Economics of Taste. He fed me free peanuts, olives and cornichons as he talked, enthused and displayed and I listened. I drank glasses of tomato juice and smoked Edward VII cigars in my new blue suit and felt for awhile, that this is where I belonged. The American Bar of the Ritz is now a casino club to which, strangely enough, I do belong. Sometimes Hugh Laurie and I will go in there and lose fifty pounds at the minimum stake blackjack table. I once went in with Peter Cook who was solemnly handed a pair of shoes to replace the white trainers he was wearing. ‘What,’ said Cook, ‘take off my lucky Reeboks! Are you mad?’ and we had gone to Crockford’s instead. London palled however. A rather unsavoury man of fifty with a perpetual giggle had tried very hard to pick me up in a pinball arcade in Piccadilly and I had hated the experience, hated, that is, how close I had come to accepting his offer of accompanying him home. We had walked together towards a taxi rank in Regent Street and I suddenly ran off, streaking up Sherwood Street and deep into unknown Soho, convinced he was following me all the way and that every sex-shop owner was a friend who would lay hands on me and return me to him. He probably, poor soul, rattled home in the taxi in a fever of terror, quite as convinced that I had marched straight into West End Central and was even at that moment furnishing the police with a detailed description. I decided that really my destiny lay in a visit to Uley. Maybe that is where I would find some kind of something, any kind of anything. A clue. An opportunity to lay an unknown ghost. What I believed I was looking for I cannot say. I can only assert that, as in a novel, the locations with which this story climaxes are the same as the locations with which it begins. Life is sometimes novel-shaped, mocking the efforts of those authors who, in an effort to make their novels life-shaped, spurn the easy symmetry and cheap resonance of reality. So I arrived in Uley and saw those members of staff who chose to remain there during the summer holidays, staying a few nights with Sister Pinder in her little cottage and drinking pints of beer in the pub with Paddy and Ian Scott-Clarke. There was nothing for me in Uley of course. They must have known that I had been expelled from Uppingham and they must have wondered what I thought I was up to now. The crushing humiliation engendered by such unquestioningly, such unconditionally kind treatment sent me on the move again, this time towards the Cotswold villages of Bourton-on-the-Water and Moreton-in-the-Marsh. It was in a Bed and Breakfast hotel in Moreton-in-the-Marsh that I happened upon my second piece of plastic; it lay snugly in the inside pocket of a casually hung jacket in the hallway, just sitting there for anyone, anyone like me, to steal. It was an Access card this time, much simpler to use, and with a signature that I could more easily reproduce than that of Patrick Brooke. I had a suitcase, a suit I had bought in London, a few other clothes, some books and unlimited spending power. It was time now to head for the Reading Festival and the thrillingly shocking possibility of a meeting with Matthew. My journey to Reading was broken in a town whose name I cannot even remember. I

197 stayed overnight in as dreary a Post House Hotel as you have ever seen, even in your worst nightmare. Your worst nightmare, of course, is the precise inspiration for designers of this species of hotel. They steal your sleeping fears like a succubus and drop them down beside the ring-roads of dying towns. It was only as I was finishing my dinner of steak and salad and beer in the dining room of this soulless assembly of melamine and artex that I realised that the date that day was the twenty-fourth of August 1975. My eighteenth birthday. It was my eighteenth birthday. I had come of age here, in this place. I was eighteen years old. Not a fifteen-year-old discovering poetry, the beauty of algebra and the treachery and terror of growing up. Not a tormented fourteen-year-old whose life has exploded into love. Not a naughty twelve-year-old who broke school bounds to visit sweet shops. Not a grown up eight-year-old who put a new boy at his ease on a train. Not a funny little boy who cried when his mole was upstaged by a donkey and didn’t dare go into the Headmaster’s classroom because he was frightened of the big boys. Not a wicked little imp who pulled down his trousers and played rudies with a boy called Tim. An eighteen-year-old youth on the run. A somewhat less than juvenile delinquent. A petty thief who ruined people’s lives with theft, betrayal, cowardice and contempt. A man. A man wholly responsible for all his actions. Alone in my room, I ordered a half bottle of whisky from room service and for the first time in my life I made myself completely drunk. Drunk in the most dismal, appalling and lonely conditions conceivable. A concrete and smoked glass travelling salesman’s shake-down, an apocalypse of orange cushions, brown curtains and elastic-cornered nylon sheets. Hardly had the whisky gone down my throat in heavily watered gulps than I added to the bathroom sink heave after heave of sour sick. My sister told me later that this was the worst day, the very worst day of all at Booton, this day of my eighteenth birthday. My first ever birthday away from home and, at that, my eighteenth. My parents had no idea where I was or what I was doing. Since I had left the Brookes’ house they had had no news of me from anybody. I had been filed as a missing person, but they knew in this England of Johnny Go Home and fresh waves of missing teenagers reported every hour, they knew that they may as well not have bothered. When August the twenty-fourth came round however, when it was my birthday, my eighteenth birthday, so Jo tells me, my mother was inconsolable all day, weeping and sobbing like a lost child, which is, I am afraid, howl am weeping as I type this. I am weeping for the shame, for the loss, the cruelty, the madness and again the shame and the shame and the shame. Weeping too for mothers everywhere, yesterday, today and tomorrow, who sit alone on the day of their child’s birth not knowing where their beloved boy or their darling girl might be, who might be with them or what they might be doing. I am weeping too for grown-up children so lost to themselves and to hope that they squat in doorways, lie on beds, stare in stupors high or wired, or sit alone all eaten up with self- hate on their eighteenth birthday. I am weeping too for the death of adolescence, the death of childhood and the death of hope: there are never enough tears to mourn their passing. The whisky had done its work with me, as whisky will. It blanked my mind enough to stop it wandering to the raspberry canes at Booton, banned it from conjuring a picture of Jo and Mother stripping clean the gooseberry bushes and denied me the image of the raw red hands of Mrs Riseborough rolling dough, stewing pears and shredding suet. Scenes from a childhood that I loathed and which sent me mad with longing, as did the





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




198 tattered photograph of the loathed familial prison that still I carried with me everywhere I went — the oval loveliness of Matthew pasted on the obverse side. Without the numb wall of whisky between my head and my heart, all these would have buffeted me with such howling waves of grief that I and all the concrete foulness about me would split apart. The following day this eighteen-year-old arose and took his headache and his suitcase and his credit cards to Reading. The Festival was too vast and frightening to penetrate, but there was a rumour of something happening on Salisbury Plain later, a rumour that Steeleye Span might be performing in the shadows of Stonehenge. If Matthew went anywhere he would go where Steeleye Span and Maddy Prior were. I see from irrefutable documentary evidence that it was a full two weeks later before I arrived in Swindon on my way to Salisbury. It seems in my memory to have been only a day or so later, perhaps those two weeks were whiskied into one long stupor. There was a grand looking hotel in Swindon, calling itself, I think, The Wiltshire, or the Wiltshire County. Four stars I counted on its marquee: four stars was no more than I expected as my due from life. I checked in, that sunny morning of the ninth of September, well used to the procedure by now. ‘Edward Bridges,’ I said to the receptionist, ‘would you have a room for the night?’ Edward Bridges was, let us imagine, the name of the man whose Access card I had stolen: the real Edward Bridges, innocent victim as he was, does not need to have his name dragged into this sordid tale. The usual procedure was gone through: the signing in, the flexible friend slapping into the bracket beneath the roller, the keys handed over with a beaming smile. ‘Charming,’ I said to the porter who came up with my suitcase, as I surveyed the room. ‘Quite charming.’ I slipped him fifty pence and laid down on the bed. Tomorrow Stonehenge. Somehow I knew, because the god of love is capricious and insolent, that this time I would bump into Matthew there. A Matthew with sideburns no doubt, a Matthew thick with muscles, but Matthew none the less. I would probably get stoned with him and, at some propitiously giggling moment, let him know, in a bubble of hilarity that I had mooned after him this four years or more. ‘Crazy man, or what?’ I would drawl, and we would laugh and joke and laugh again. Yes, that is how I would play it tomorrow. I frowned as I crossed and uncrossed my feet. Those shoes. Really, those shoes! The one little luxury I had not been able to obtain with all my stolen money and all my stolen credit was a decent pair of shoes. Being size twelve and half it had never been easy. Perhaps Swindon might provide where others had denied. One never knew. I hauled myself up to my feet, straightened my smart blue suit, winked to myself in the mirror and left the room. ‘There you go!’ I said in that silly, cheerful, English way as I dropped my key on the reception desk. And would you believe it, the first thing I come across is a damned good shoe shop where they have, as if awaiting my arrival, a pair of thunderingly sound black semi- brogues in a perfect twelve and half? Excellent. Capital. I walked up and down and inspected them in the angled mirror.

199 ‘Do you know,’ I said, handing over my Access card, and casting a rueful glance at the cracked old pair that lay on the carpet looking for all the world as if they were waiting for Godot, ‘these fit so well I think I’ll wear them home!’ I passed a little jeweller’s shop next and the idea struck me that the wristwatch I wore was commonplace and ill-favoured. The assistant was most helpful and showed me first a smart young Ingersoll, charming in its way but worth less than ten pounds. ‘Maybe you have something a little more stylish?’ I ventured. The little man dipped down below the counter to find a tray and I ran from the shop with the Ingersoll clutched to me. A very satisfactory morning’s shopping, I thought to myself as I flew from the shopping centre, but trying on the nerves. Time now, I think, to return to the hotel for a spot of television and a plate of club sandwiches. I picked up my key from the reception desk and bounced cheerfully up the stairs. I may be eighteen, I conceded, but that did not mean I was in need of electric lifts. There was spring in me yet. I unlatched the door and was surprised to see that there was a man in my room. ‘It’s all right,’ I said as I entered. ‘If you can come back and clean later? I’ll leave the room free for you in about an hour.’ Another man appeared, stepping sideways out of the bathroom. Two men in my room. Both wearing grey suits. ‘Mr Bridges?’ said the first. ‘Yes.’ ‘Mr Edward Bridges?’ ‘That’s right... God how stupid can a man be? It never for a minute crossed my mind, until they revealed themselves, that they were anything other than strangely dressed and gendered chambermaids. ‘We are police officers, sir. We have reason to believe that you may be using a stolen credit card, the property of a Mr Edward Bridges of Solihull.’ ‘Ah,’ I said and smiled. All at once a hundred thousand gallons of acid poison poured out of me and a hundred thousand pounds of lead fell from my shoulders. ‘Yes. Yes,’ I said. ‘I’m afraid that you are absolutely right.’ ‘If you wouldn’t mind coming with us, sir? I am arresting you now and will shortly make a formal charge at the station.’ I was so happy, so blissfully, radiantly, wildly happy that if I could have sung I would have sung. If I could have danced I would have danced. I was free. At last I was free. I was going on a journey now where every decision would be taken for me, every thought would be thought for me and every day planned for me. I was going back to school. I almost giggled at the excitement and televisual glamour of the handcuffs, one for my right wrist the other for the policeman’s left. ‘If you’ll just put your hand in my jacket pocket, sir, like so . . Of course, the hotel. The sight of a criminal youth being led away in handcuffs was no kind of happy advertisement for the Wiltshire Hotel, Swindon. Cuffed together then,

200 each of us with a hand in his left pocket, the two of us, followed by the silent other who carried my suitcase, descended the stairs. The two receptionists stood on tiptoe to watch me go. I gave them a small, sad, sweet smile as I left. And do you know what? One of them, the elder of the two, perhaps a mother herself, smiled back. One of warmest smiles I have ever been given. I expected to be pushed into a waiting police car, but no, we walked on and soon I saw the reason why. Directly opposite the hotel doors, not thirty yards away, was a huge building with a blue sign. WILTSHIRE CONSTABULARY ‘I hope I get special consideration,’ I said, ‘for being easy on the legwork.’ The policeman not attached to me smiled. I was smiling, everyone was smiling. It was a glorious day. ‘Special consideration for being such a prannett as to commit a crime within sight of a police station?’ said the policeman. ‘Special extra sentencing more like. We do like a challenge, you know.’ The most important consideration, the only consideration so far as I was concerned, was to keep my identity a secret. They could charge me as a John Doe, or whatever the British equivalent might be — not Fred Bloggs surely? — and I would be happy. But they must never find out my real name. There was no reason that they should, I argued. I had been travelling for some weeks now as Edward Bridges. How could they connect this non- person to Stephen Fry of Booton, Norfolk? I sat in my little police cell and hummed a hum to myself. I imagined that once they had totted up all the depredations made on the Access card I would serve at least two years in prison. Two years in which I could do some serious writing, perhaps even apply to retake my A levels. I would emerge, newly qualified, write a postcard to my parents to let them know that everything was all right, and then start life again. Properly. In the interview room, the same two officers, a detective constable and a detective sergeant, played that fiendish role game in which each of them adopts a different stance towards the accused. The version they played was Nice Cop and Even Nicer Cop, each competing with the other for the part of Even Nicer Cop. It is hard not to crumble under such a cunningly vicious approach. ‘I mean you’re a young lad, you’re well spoken,’ said Nice Cop. Ah, that wonderful English euphemism, ‘well spoken’. I was well spoken, certainly, but not well spoken of. ‘You could only be the son of very understanding parents,’ said Even Nicer Cop. ‘They’ll be so worried.’ ‘Maybe you’re on the missing child register,’ said Nice. ‘It would take us a bit of time, but we’d find out in the end.’ ‘Try one of these,’ said Even Nicer, offering up a pack of Benson and Hedges. ‘Not quite so rough on the throat as those Embassys, I think you’ll find.’ ‘It’s just that I’ve given my parents enough grief already,’ I said. ‘I’m eighteen now and I’d like to take responsibility for this on my own. ‘Now that,’ said Nice, ‘is very commendable. But let’s think it through for a moment. I reckon if you want to stop giving your parents grief, you’ll let us call them up straight

201 away. That’s the way I see it.’ ‘But you don’t know them!’ I said. ‘They’ll descend in a swoop with lawyers and things and I ... I just couldn’t face it.’ ‘Hey up, I reckon it’s time for a cup of tea,’ said Even Nicer. ‘Let me guess. . . white, two sugars? Am I right?’ ‘Spot on. Thank you.’ Nice and I chewed the fat awhile. ‘See,’ said Nice. ‘If we don’t know your name it’s very hard for us to charge you. We know that you have dishonestly obtained a pecuniary advantage for yourself by using a stolen credit card, but for all we know, you are wanted for murder in Bedfordshire or rape in Yorkshire.’ ‘Oh but I’m not!’ ‘Technically,’ said Nice, ‘you have also been guilty of forgery. Every time you sign one of those credit card vouchers you forge a signature, isn’t that right?’ I nodded. ‘Well now you see, it’s more or less up to us. If we charge you for forgery, you’ll go to prison for at least five years.’ ‘Five years!’ ‘Woah, woah, woah... I said if. If, mind.’ I chewed my lower lip and pondered. There was a question that had been bugging me since my arrest. ‘I wonder if you mind me asking you something?’ I said. ‘Ask away, son. ‘Well, it’s just this. How did you find me?’ ‘How did we find you?’ ‘Yes. I mean, there you were in my hotel room. Was it the wristwatch, had you followed me from the jewellers?’ ‘Wristwatch?’ Nice frowned and made a note. Oops. They had known nothing about the Ingersoll. ‘What then?’ ‘It was your shoes, son. ‘My shoes?’ ‘When you checked into the hotel, the girl at reception, she noticed how your shoes were very tatty, see? “A tramp’s shoes” she called them. After you’d gone up to the room, she thinks to herself. “A young man like that, nice suit, but tatty shoes. Something not right, there.” So she calls up the credit card company and they tell her that the card you gave her when you checked in, that was a stolen card. So she rings us up, see? Simple really.’ ‘And what was the first thing I went out and bought?’ I moaned, looking up at the ceiling like a rabbi at prayer. ‘A nice new pair of shoes.’ ‘Smart girl. Always look at the shoes first,’ Nice said approvingly. ‘Didn’t Sherlock Holmes say that very thing once?’ The door opened and Even Nicer popped his head round, ‘Oh, Stephen, one thing I forgot to ask...’ ‘Yes?’ ‘Ah,’ said Even Nicer. ‘Aha! so it is Stephen, then? Stephen Fry.’ What a pratt, I mean, what a gibbon. Not since Gordon Jackson replied to the German

202 guard’s English ‘Good luck’ with an instant ‘Thank you!’ as he and Dickie Attenborough climbed aboard the bus to freedom in The Great Escape has anyone been so irretrievably, unforgivably, slappably, dumb. ‘Oh,’ I said. ‘That was a bit silly of me, wasn’t it?’ ‘Well frankly, Stephen, yes it was,’ said Even Nicer. ‘Stephen Fry was the name on three of the books in your suitcase, see. ‘But,’ said Nice, ‘knowing your name does make our lives easier and when our lives are easier, your life is easier. I was on the register of missing children, having been placed there weeks before my eighteenth birthday so within minutes my parents had been telephoned. Within minutes of that I had myself a brief, as we lags call them. My godmother and her husband lived near Abingdon, and he was a lawyer. My parents acted swiftly. The first night was spent in the police cells. I was in a fever of worry about seeing my parents in the magistrate’s court the next morning. I didn’t want to break down, I wanted to show them that I, and no one else, was taking responsibility for all this. I thought that if they heard through the police that I had refused all thought of bail, it might send them the signal that I was prepared to face my music alone. Nice and Even Nicer, once they began to get some picture of the full extent of my travels, told me that it might take a long time for my case to come to trial, for there was a great deal of paperwork to be gone through from several English counties. These things always took time. The morning passed in such a rush that I barely remember anything about it, except that I was marched up from the cells, placed in a dock, a policeman beside me, and asked my name and age. ‘The question of bail?’ the magistrate asked. ‘Your honour, bail is not requested in this case,’ said my lawyer. A look towards me from the magistrate as of a camel inspecting a blow-fly and a note was made. There was muttering talk from the police solicitor concerning the collation of paperwork at which the magistrate grunted and placed me on remand to reappear in another two weeks, by which time the police solicitor should have framed a complete set of charges to which it would be possible for me to plead. Straight from the police court I was led, daring to look up just once to see if I could spot my parents in the gallery, into a van and towards prison. They had been there. I had seen my mother’s anxious face, desperate to catch my eye and give me a warm smile. I had tried to smile back, but I had not known how. That old curse again. How to smile. If I smiled too broadly it might look like triumphalism; if I smiled too weakly it might look like a feeble bid for sympathy. If I smiled somewhere in between it would, I knew, look, as always, like plain smugness. Somehow I managed to bare my teeth in a manner that expressed, I hope, sorrow, gratitude, determination, shame, remorse and resolve. There again, why should I have to design a smile or an expression? If I felt all those things, which I did, why should I have to act them? Did normal people question their smiles and looks, did they go into lathers of insecurity about the impressions they gave, the figures they cut? If I truly cared about what people thought, surely I would alter not my reactions, but my actions. I would change my behaviour, not the nuance of my smiles.

203 Or did I think that style was parent, not the child of substance? And was I right, deep down, ultimately right, to think so? The van, in which I was the only prisoner, sped along the motorway until we crossed the border into the brand-new county of Avon, passing by the Chippings — Chipping Norton, Chipping Hamden and Chipping Sodbury. Hadn’t there been a boy called Meade at Stouts Hill who lived at Chipping Sodbury? A dim memory returned to me of us all once crowding round Meade and teasing him about his buck-teeth and of him fighting back with the gloriously pre-war riposte, ‘You’re rotters, all of you. Nothing but utter rotters!’ I had immediately taken his side because ‘utter rotter’ was a phrase my mother used — still uses to this day on those rare occasions when she is moved to disapproval — and this made me feel that Meade must be a good thing. Strange the ways in which loyalty to one’s parents can show itself: never when they are there and when they would cut off a finger to see the tiniest scrap of evidence of filial devotion, but always when they are miles away. I visited a boy’s parents one Sunday for tea when I was eight or nine and saw that they used Domestos in their lavatory, not Harpic which we used at home and I remember thinking poorly of these people because of it. We were Vim, Persil Fairy Liquid and RAG, other families were Ajax, Omo, Sqweezee and AA and one pitied them and felt slightly repelled: didn’t they realise they had got it all wrong? Fierce pride in one s parents’ choice of bathroom scourers, withering contempt for their opinions on anything concerning life, the world and oneself. The van stopped at a large set of gates. 'What’s this place called?’ I asked the policeman cuffed to me. ‘Didn’t they tell you, son? It’s called Pucklechurch.’ ‘Pucklechurch?’ I said. ‘Ah. Pucklechurch.’ ‘But that’s so friendly! It sounds so sweet.’ ‘Well, lad,’ said the policeman, getting to his feet. ‘I don’t think that’s precisely the idea.’ Pucklechurch was a prison for young offenders on remand. I think all the inmates were between sixteen and twenty-five, and either awaiting sentencing or allocation to major prisons. You will find that there are two states of being when you are placed on remand. Con and Non Con. A non con is technically innocent of any crime: he is confined because bail has been denied him or because he cannot afford it. He has either pleaded not guilty or else, as in my case, he has not yet had a chance to plead: either way, the law regards him as guiltless until proven otherwise. The cons, however, the cons have pleaded guilty and await their trial and sentencing. Non cons wore brown uniforms, could receive as many visitors a day as they pleased, have as much food brought in as they could eat and were not obliged to work. They could spend their own money, watch television and enjoy themselves. For the first two weeks, that then, is more or less what I did. I settled down in B wing, very happily, with a cell to myself. The only moment of pity and terror came when my parents visited on the third day. I pictured them trying to decide which day might be best for a visit. Not the very first day because I would still be finding my feet. The second day too, that might still look too quick and swoopy. The fourth day would perhaps give the impression of indifference.

204 They wanted to show that they cared and that they loved me: the third day was the best day. You have all seen prison visiting rooms on television or in the cinema. You can picture the distress of parents, sitting on one side of a glass cage and watching their son being led forwards in prison uniform. We did our best. They smiled, they gave straight- lipped nods of firm encouragement. There was no questioning, no recrimination, no overflow of emotion. The moment that tried me the most sorely came when, as the interview drew to a close, my mother took from her handbag a fat wadge of crosswords neatly clipped from the back page of The Times. She had saved the crossword every day since I had been away, removing the answers from the previous day’s puzzle with completely straight, careful scissor strokes. When she pushed them under the window and I saw what they were I made a choking noise and closed my eyes. I tried to smile and I tried not to breathe in, because I knew that if I breathed in the choke would turn into a series of huge heaving sobs that might never end. There was more love in every straightly snipped cut than one might think was contained in the whole race of man. I watched them go and lurched dumbly towards the prison officer who turned me round and led me back to my cell. Prison officers, known of course as screws, found themselves at this point at an embarrassing sartorial mid-point. The older guard still wore the black of Mr McKay in Porridge, their proud chests glistening with a whistle chain that led from a silver tunic button into a pleated breast pocket, while the newer officers had to bear the indignity of a sort of light blue suiting that made them look something between Postman Pat and a mimsy Lufthansa steward. They felt it keenly, you could tell. The prison currency then was tobacco, called ‘burn’. I dare say drugs are now the gold standard, but in my day I never heard of any drugs proliferating at Pucklechurch. My parents had given me enough money to buy cigarettes, so all was fine for that first two weeks, which passed in a blur of letter-writing and crossword solving. I was left very much to myself, as were all non cons. The day came however, when I had to ride back in a police van to Swindon to make my plea. The police solicitor had decided, in the light of the dozens and dozens of uses I had made of the credit cards, that four specimen charges would be presented. You can see a photocopy of the Memorandum of the Court Order in the picture section of this book. I pleaded guilty to all four charges, one of the straight theft of a watch, contrary to Section of the Theft Act of 1968 (which raises the question, what on earth could be the offences covered by sections 1—6?), the other three charges being that I did, by deception, obtain a pecuniary advantage for myself contrary to that same Theft Act, Section 15. The Clerk of the Court in Swindon, you will notice, has rather sweetly typed ‘pecunairy’ in each instance. The moment the fourth ‘guilty’ had mumbled from my lips I was instantly a con, convicted not by the court, but out of my own mouth and my status at Pucklechurch was to change. For this second appearance in Swindon was by no means my trial. A probation officer was appointed by the court to look into my case, my history and my future. The trial was set for November the first, a whole month and a half away. I still stoutly refused

205 bail and, returning in the van, resigned myself to the prospect of seven weeks of ‘real bird’. The first thing to change was the colour of my uniform. Next, my accommodation. I was marched to A wing, shouted at nose to nose every time I slowed down or looked from left to right, and told that I had better get used, pretty fucking quick, to being treated like the shitty little villain that I was. The only burn to be got now was from work. If you worked every day you might get just enough to buy a half ounce of Old Holborn tobacco to last you the week and two packs of cigarette papers, these were standard Rizla+ rolling-papers, but presented in buff coloured packaging with HM PRISONS ONLY printed at an angle across the flap. Work was assigned: you either mopped and polished the floor (a great treat because you got to use the electric floor polisher) or you worked in the ‘shop’, painting toy soldiers. I sometimes tried to imagine the children who received for Christmas a set of Napoleonic plastic soldiers, hand-painted by prisoners and how they would react if they knew the provenance. Now, of course, one knows that most children’s toys, from Barbie dolls to the latest Disney fashion imperatives have been constructed under conditions often a great deal worse than those of Pucklechurch, in which young men sat, tongues out, happily plying the Humbrol in a well-heated room, like enthusiastic members of the Stouts Hill Model Club, with Simon Bates and Radio 1 blaring out good fun pop. After four weeks spent in this dozily lulling routine work, I was promoted to floor mopping, what we used to call at Uppingham ‘lay fag’. That’s the key to my contentment at Pucklechurch. I’ve said it before in interviews and it’s been taken as a witty joke, but life in prison was a breeze for me, because at that point I had spent most of life at boarding school. I didn’t mean to suggest by that, as was supposed, that boarding schools are like prisons, I meant that prisons are like boarding schools. I knew how to tease authority enough to be popular with the inmates and tolerated by the screws; I knew how to stay cheerful and think up diversions, scams and pranks. I knew, ironically, given my inability to do so in real boarding schools, how to survive. Some of the sixteen-year-olds at Pucklechurch had never left home before. Nearly all of them were inside for TDA or TOC-ing, which is to say ‘Taking and Driving Away’ or ‘Taking w/out Owner’s Consent’ — there must be some difference between the two offences, but I’m dashed if I know what it is. Also, the vast majority of them were from South Wales and the West Country. I found something immensely endearing about that. I had been trained by television to believe that all lags are either Scottish, Liverpudlian, or, most especially, Londoners. I had expected Sweeney accents and Glaswegian brogues, not Devonian burrs and Chepstow hilts. There was little free time. Up at six, fold up all the bedding material, pick up one’s potty and slop out in the lavatories. ‘It is not a potty! It is a slop-pail!’ ‘Well, I prefer to think of it as a potty, sir.’ ‘You can fucking think of it what you fucking like. You will not call that cunt a fucking potty, you will call that cunt a fucking slop-pail, got it?’ ‘Very good, sir. It shall be as you wish.’ After slopping out (a practice that Oscar Wilde, a hundred years ago had written to the newspapers to protest about and which the Howard League for Penal Reform has finally, I believe, managed to push into desuetude) one would be handed a safety razor (in

206 my case a fruitless offering, since I was still so testosterone light that I had not even the faintest traces of down on my cheeks or upper-lip) and the ablution ceremonies would be performed, just as at school only conducted in complete silence, save for the rhythmical brushing of teeth and scraping of stubble. Next, we were marched down to breakfast for a completely familiar (to me) prep-school tea of tinned tomatoes and grey scrambled egg on fried bread. Then we were led to work. In the evenings there came Association. Association was the prison’s major carrot and stick. ‘Right! You, off Association for a week.’ ‘First one to clear up this fucking mess gets an extra ten minutes’ Association.’ Association took place in a large room, where there was a television, a dartboard and a ping-pong table. To me it resembled exactly the games room of a French youth hostel, only without the appalling smell. It was on my second night’s Association that a large con put his hand on my knee and told me that I was cute. ‘Ere, why don’t you fuck off and leave ‘im alone,’ a Bristolian car-thief next to me said. There was no fight. That was it. No terrible moment later in the showers when I was told to bend down and pick up the soap. Just a hand on the thigh, a squeeze and a shy withdrawal. Later that evening someone came up to me and said, ‘Two’s up then!’ ‘Sorry?’ I said. ‘Two’s up with you!’ I agreed with him pleasantly and wandered off. As I was finishing my cigarette another con approached and said, ‘I’ll take that off you, mate.’ ‘Fine, help yourself,’ I said, handing him the weedy little butt of my roll-up. He gave me a thump on my back. ‘You said you’d go two’s up with me!’ ‘I’m terribly sorry,’ I said. ‘But I had absolutely no idea what “two’s up” meant.’ Those who had run out of their supplies of burn lived on the fag-ends of others, going two’s up with the smallest, thinnest butts, collecting dozens together to make new roll-ups or burning their fingers and lips by smoking each one down to a millimetric strip. My accent and vocabulary endeared me to everyone. Again, I had expected nothing but jeering cries of ‘Oh I say! How absolutely topping, don’t you know?’ and similar inaccurate mockeries, but I think the inmates enjoyed the confusion I caused to the screws who found it difficult to talk to me without thinking of me as Officer Class or suspecting me to be some Home Office official’s son, planted to keep an eye on things. ‘Don’t think me some awful antinomian anarch, sir,’ I might say to one of the screws, ‘but is the rule about drinking hot cocoa in precisely forty seconds not perhaps dispensable? The ensuing scalding of the soft tissues about the uvula is most aggravating.’ Pathetic, I suppose, pathetic, vain and silly, but in circumstances where survival is the key any human characteristic or quality you can dredge up must be used. If you are strong physically, you use your strength, if you have charisma and inner dignity, you use them, if you have charm, you use charm. The smallest sign of servility, subservience, flattery, sycophancy or sneakiness is loathed by screws and cons alike. The screws will act on ‘information received’ but they won’t thank the grass or protect him when he is duly punished by his victim. The only unpleasant moment within my eye- or earshot came when a sixteen-year-old

207 who was ungovernable in his stupidity, insubordination and insolence (I thought he was suffering from some sort of mental illness, for he would giggle and became so manic that it sent shivers down my spine) was, after pushing things too far, taken into the bathroom along from my cell by three of the screws. There was the sound of much pummelling and exceptionally dull thumping and I realised, with a shock, that he was being expertly beaten up. He came out alternately giggling and weeping. As he was led down the corridor, in great physical pain as he was, he tried to kick one of the screws. This was not a Jimmy Boyle refusal to be broken, this was not Shawshank resilience, this was illness. I wanted immediately to write to the Home Secretary and talked to Barry, a witty Welshman whose cell was opposite to me, about doing so. ‘They reads your letters, see. Won’t do no good. And when you’re out of yurr you’ll forget allabout it.’ He was right of course. When I left, I made no representation to anyone. Barry, as it happens, couldn’t read at all, so I set about teaching him. He it was who dubbed me ‘The Professor’, which was to become my prison nickname. Most people are ‘that cunt’ but the possession of a nickname puts you a little higher up the ladder than the others. I was lucky enough to have a whole cell to myself, back in those days of disgraceful prison undercrowding, and would alternately sleep on the top and the bottom bunk to help demarcate the days. We had the treat to look forward to every Sunday of a visit from the prison chaplain, who, bizarrely, went by the name of the Reverend Chaplin and, more bizzarrely still, looked exactly like Charlie Chaplin: exceptionally thin, with tight black hair and a toothbrush moustache. With the usual inmate irony he was referred to as Ollie, as in Hardy. He let me play the piano for the Sunday service, attendance at which was optional, but which became, on account of the eccentricity of my playing, the hottest event of the prison week. I was allowed six hours off work a week without loss of pay so that I could practise the hymns. I entertained hugely by performing, not accurately (‘Anyone can play accurately, but I play with wonderful expression. As far as the piano is concerned, sentiment is my forte’) but with massively self-important arpeggios and symphonic style endings. Thus, after ‘The church’s one foundation’ for example I would end with a Daaaaaah- dum! Dadum-da-dum-da-um-da-dum-daaaaa-aaaaah DUUUMMMMM! And just as everyone was sitting down, I would add a high Dum-di-dum-di-dum. Dum DUM! Dum. (Pause) Dum (Pause) Dum (bigger pause, followed by a tiny) Dim . . . That surely must be the end, but no... a sudden quick bass Tara-tara-DOM. And finally it was over. The Bishop of Malmesbury came to visit one Wednesday. A group of us was selected to sit round him m a circle while he asked us to speak frankly about prison conditions and how we were being treated and what we thought of ourselves. There were screws standing against the walls, eyeing the ceiling and we all knew better than to complain. All except Fry, of course. ‘I would like to draw your lordship’s attention to one thing that has been bothering me,’ I said. ‘It is, I fear, a very grave matter and the source of aggravation and discomfort to many of us here.’ There was a hissing in of breath from the others and a meaningful clearing of the throat from one of the senior screws. ‘Please,’ said the Bishop, ‘please feel free.’

208 ‘I am sure,’ I said, ‘that Her Majesty has many calls on her time and cannot be expected to know everything that goes on in her name within the walls of institutions such as this.’ ‘No indeed,’ agreed the Bishop, blinking slightly. ‘However, I must urge you to draw her attention to the quality of the soap available in our bathrooms.’ ‘The soap?’ ‘The soap, my lord Bishop. ‘It lathers not, neither does it float it doesn’t smell nice, it doesn’t even clean you. The best that can be said for it, I am afraid, is that it keeps you company in the bath.’ This was from an old Morecambe and Wise book I had bought years ago at Uppingham. The Bishop burst out laughing and the screws dutifully joined in with smiles, shaking their heads at the jollity of it all. ‘If your lordship will undertake to make urgent representation in the right quarters?’ ‘Certainly, certainly! Um, may I ask you, young man, I know this is not good prison form and you really don’t have to answer, but may I ask you none the less,... what, ah, are you in for?’ ‘Oh the usual,’ I said carelessly. ‘Churchmen.’ ‘I beg your pardon?’ ‘The senseless slaughter of clerics. I murdered four minor canons, two archdeacons, a curate and a suffragan bishop in a trail of bloody carnage that raged from Norwich to Hexham last year. Surely you read about it in the Church Times, my lord? I think it made the third page of the late racing extra.’ ‘All right, now. That’s enough of that, Fry.’ ‘Yes, sir. I’m sorry, Bishop, you must forgive my freakish humours. In here we laugh that we may not weep. It was theft I’m afraid, my lord. Plain old credit-card fraud.’ ‘Oh. Oh, I see.’ I continued to teach Barry to read, while I practised the piano, zoomed along the corridors with my silver electric polisher and wrote letters to Jo Wood and other friends. Barry had, when I had collected my wage packet at the end of my first week as a con, told me that the best way to make your burn go further is to pre-roll the cigarettes and lay them out to dry on the radiator pipe of your cell. I had dutifully done this and returned from Association to find every single one of my beautifully rolled cigarettes gone. ‘Lesson number one, matey,’ he said. ‘You can’t trust no one on the inside.’ What an arse. The cell door is left open during Association, it is only closed when the occupant is ‘banged up’ inside. The idea that in a building full of thieves I could cheerfully have left tobacco lying around and expected it to be there on my return was absurd. Barry enjoyed my cigarettes and every now and then would let me have half of one as that first pitiful burnless week dragged by. We were walking towards Association one evening the following week when Barry and I thought it would be amusing to drag our heels on the floor, which always left a black rubber mark. I stopped doing it as I heard approaching footsteps and Barry was caught mid-streak. ‘Hughes! Off Association two days.’

209 ‘But, sir!’ said Barry. ‘Don’t whine, you miserable cunt. Three days.’ ‘Sir, I feel I should confess that I am just as guilty,’ I said. ‘I was doing exactly the same thing before you came round the corner. In fact I made the worst marks.’ ‘Is that right, lad? I didn’t see you, though did I? I didn’t see it, you didn’t do it. Extra hour’s Association for honesty.’ ‘Lesson One, matey,’ I said to Barry as the screw passed by. ‘Baffle them.’ Every two or three days or so I would receive a visit from my court appointed probation officer. The great question facing me was the nature of the sentence likely to be passed down from the bench. Most of the experienced cons told me to expect DC, Detention Centre — the ‘short sharp shock’ that Home Secretary Roy Jenkins had proudly added to the judiciary’s roster of available sentences. DC came in three-month packages, from a three months’ minimum to a maximum, I think, of nine months or possibly a year. It sounded foul. Up at five, run everywhere, gym and physical jerks at all times, running to dining halls, ten minutes to eat while standing up, more physical jerks and weight training, and what would now be called zero tolerance of all offences. The DC inmate emerged physically powerful, immensely fit and utterly zomboid in manner. An ideal candidate in fact for a job on the outside such as the bouncer at a seedy night-club, which would usually get him back on the inside for aggravated assault within a matter of weeks. This time he would be in Big Nick and a full-blown member of the criminal classes. Borstal was the other option, an indeterminate sentence, which was completed by the inmate rising up the ranks, winning a series of different coloured ties, until such time as the governor thought him fit to be freed. That sounded ghastly too. ‘Or of course, there’s just good old Nick. Six months, prolly,’ some of them reckoned. Mr White the court-appointed probation officer, who generously left me a pack of B&H at the end of every visit, was less pessimistic. He believed that it was essentially down to his report and he saw no reason so far not to recommend two years’ probation. These were first offences, I had solid upright parents, I had learned my lesson. I had learned my lesson, hadn’t I? I nodded seriously. I had learned my lesson, all right. I cannot claim that prison politicised me in any way. It was not until years later, starting with those inevitable late-night student conversations at university, that I began to look seriously at the world through political eyes, but I do remember shivering with embarrassment at something that was said to me. Embarrassment is not a political emotion, it may be the British national emotion, but it is not political: rage is political, hatred can be political and so too can love, but not, I think, embarrassment. What was said to me and I can’t remember who said it (one of the Londoners I think, for Pucklechurch, in spite of that preponderance of West Country and Welsh inmates was also used as an overspill prison for Wormwood Scrubs, taking moderate and non- dangerous offenders, usually those who were serving sentences for the non-payment of fines) but it was said none the less, just as it had been said to Oscar Wilde. ‘Person like you shouldn’t be in a place like this,’ the con said to me. ‘What do you mean?’ ‘Well, you’ve got an education.’

210 ‘Not really. I’ve got some 0 levels, but that’s it.’ ‘You know what I mean. These places aren’t for the likes of you.’ I wish I could pretend he hadn’t used that phrase ‘for the likes of you’, but he really did. This is how Oscar Wilde relates a similar experience in De Profundis. — the poor thief who, recognising me as we tramped round the yard at Wandsworth, whispered to me in the hoarse prison-voice men get from long and compulsory silence: "I feel sorry for you: it is harder for the likes of you than it is for the likes of us.” A hundred years on and still Britain is Britain. I tried to reply with the obvious, but none the less deeply felt by me, reply that I thought I deserved prison if anything more than he did. I had had every opportunity, every love, every care lavished on me. He heard me out in that non-listening way that convicts have and said: ‘Yeah, but still, eh? I mean, it’s not right, is it? Not really.’ The day for my court appearance drew near. I had received advance notice by letter from my mother that their old friend Oliver Popplewell, at that time not yet a judge, but a Queen’s Counsel none the less, would be speaking for me in court. It was immensely kind of him to do so, but how I wished he would not: the idea made me writhe with embarrassment. A West Country magistrate’s court was not his milieu. He was not even a criminal barrister, he specialised in commercial and insurance law. It must have been embarrassing for him too, knowing (for he was no fool) that the Swindon bench would go out of their way not to be impressed by this smart London silk, brought in by middle-class parents to keep their son out of the hands of the penal system. Maybe they might think that they had paid for him, paid the staggering sums that QCs cost. How alienating and infuriating that would be... I arrived feeling very nervous and deeply pessimistic. Popplewell did a magnificent job however, no forensic rhetoric, no Latin, no appeals to law or precedent, merely straight, slightly nervous (real or cunningly assumed I cannot tell) representation. He had done this out of friendship for my parents and he performed the task with great humility: whether they asked him or he offered, to this day I do not know. He spoke to the bench as one who had known me from my birth and one who knew my parents as friends. He was aware that their worships would take the probation officer’s report into consideration and hoped that they would take into consideration too the remorse and foolishness felt by an intelligent child who had gone off the rails, more as an act of teenage rebellion than as a threat to society. That the stability and unreserved love of his parents would also be taken into account, he was sure, as would be the very real promise that a young man of such intelligence showed the very real good he might do, at this turning point in his life, to the society he had scorned in this temporary fit of adolescent mutiny. Oliver sat down in a swirl of black gown. The three members of the bench nodded to each other and asked for the probation officer, Mr White, whose report they had now read, to ask what sentence he thought proper. White came through like a good ‘un and said that he saw no reason, especially in view of the long custodial remand period I had served, for any sentence to be handed down other than an order for two years probation. ‘He has somewhere to live?’ Popplewell rose. ‘With his parents, your worships, who will undertake to see that he obeys any order the court sees fit to make.’

211 More head-knocking and babbling before the beak in the middle cleared his throat and glared at me. ‘Stand up, please. You have led a very privileged life, young man. You have been expensively educated and you have repaid the patience and devotion of all those around you with dishonesty and deceit. Let us be clear, the crimes you have committed have not been schoolboy japes. They have been very serious offences indeed. In the light of the probation officer’s report, however, and various other representations it is the sentence of this court that you be placed on probation for a period of two years, during which time you are to reside...’ I don’t remember the rest. It wasn’t Big Nick, Detention Centre or Borstal, that was all that mattered to me, I was to all intents and purposes, a free man. I turned slightly in the dock and caught my mother’s eyes which were bright with tears. What was I going to do now, I wondered? And for how long was I going to ask myself what I was going to do, as if I were someone else, a stranger observing myself with curiosity and puzzlement. The long drive back to Norfolk was friendly and unstrained. I don’t know what either of my parents thought would happen next. I think they only knew for certain that there was nothing that they could make happen. My mother, always more optimistic, believed, I am certain, that things could only get better. I fell into my sister’s arms. She had been furious with me, furious for the grief I had caused Mother and furious for the atmosphere that had dwelt at Booton while I was away, but she hugged me and forgave me and wept. Roger, crisply short-back-and-sided shook his head with a smile and said that I was a clot. The first thing I had to do was await the visit of the local probation officer appointed to take over my case. His name was Boyce and he had a snowy white beard. I had to visit him initially once a week, I think, and chat. He encouraged me to write while I was thinking what to do, so I wrote a strange updating of the old Greek myth of Theseus and Procrustes. I will not even begin to lower my hands into the steaming pile of psychological implications lying there, but just leave it at that. I gave it to Boyce to read and he passed it back professing himself completely unable to make head or tail of it. Reading it now, nor can I. More urgently, I had discovered that Norwich City College was having its final enrolment day. They offered a one year course of A levels in most of the major subjects. I rushed to join the queue and found myself in the office of a twinkly little man who was head of arts admissions. ‘I would like to apply to do English, French and History of Art A levels,’ I said. He shook his head sorrowfully as he read my application form. Next to the question, Attainments? I had written ‘Prep-school sub-prefect and 3rd XI scorer’. ‘I’m afraid,’ he said, ‘that English and History of Art are both full up. If you had come on the first day of enrolment...’ The first day of enrolment had been the day of my sentencing. ‘I must tell you this,’ I said, more urgency and concentration and power in my voice than had ever been there before. ‘If you admit me on to those courses I will get A grades in each subject. I will take S levels in all subjects and get Grade Ones. I will take Cambridge Entrance...'

212 ‘We don’t do Cambridge Entrance here...’ ‘Nevertheless,’ I said. ‘I will go to the library, take out past papers and, if I have to, take a job in the evening to be able to pay one of your staff to invigilate while I sit the Cambridge Entrance. I will be given a place to read English at Queens’ College. If you take me on, this is what will happen.’ He looked at me with his blue twinkly eyes. I looked back. My entire destiny was in the hands of this man. What had he had for breakfast? What were his views on failed public school boys screaming for the assistance of state-funded City Colleges? Did he have children? Were they difficult or good? Had he been to Cambridge or did he loathe Oxbridge and everything it stood for? His blue unreadable eyes just twinkled back, as inscrutable and potent as a Siamese cat’s. ‘I must be mad,’ he said, scribbling his signature on my form with a sigh. ‘Take that to the office next door. Term starts on Monday. I’ll be taking you for Chaucer.’

213 Catching Up I WAS DOWN IN THE basement rooms of Norwich’s Bohemian hang-out, Just John’s Delicatique. On what dark night of the soul the word Delicatique was born no one knew and John refused to say, but his coffee shop was the place in Norwich to talk art, music and politics. I had not been able that morning to bear the suspense any more of waiting for the postman and news from Cambridge. The promised A levels and S levels had been achieved in the summer, that glorious summer of ‘76, and the following November, alone but for a single invigilator in a huge hall at City College, I had sat the Cambridge Entrance exam. After two weeks of scaring the postman off his bike, I told my mother that I had had enough. ‘I can’t take this any more. I’m going into Norwich. If there’s anything in the post, feel free to open it. I’ll be at Just John’s at lunchtime.’ The post in Booton didn’t arrive until at least ten in the morning and the only bus into Norwich left the corner of the lane at seven-forty on the dot, so the choice was Postman or Norwich. It was good to be back in Just John’s. The usual crowd were there: Jem, impossibly, Byronically handsome worshipper of Blake and Jim Morrison; Nicky, Rugby School expulsee and amiable conversationalist, Greg and Jonathan, two twinkly and amusing brothers and the small gang of other café society regulars. We sat, drank coffee, nibbled carrot-cake and sipped at communally paid for shared glasses of frighteningly expensive Urquell Pilsner, talking of this, that and everything in between. ‘You look nervous,’ said Greg. He pointed out that every twenty seconds I had been looking at my watch and that my right leg had been bouncing up and on down on the ball of its foot — a mannerism Hugh Laurie to this day constantly upbraids me for. He used to believe that I did it to put him off when we played chess together at Cambridge (see photograph): in fact I am never aware that I do it. Hugh’s way of putting me off was to checkmate me, which is a great deal less sporting. ‘It’s nothing,’ I said. ‘Just that... no, there can’t be anything. It’s ten past one. If there was a letter my mother would have called straight away. Just then Just John himself appeared halfway down the stairs: ‘Stephen!’ he yelled across the buzz of frothy talk and frothing cappuccino. ‘Telephone for you!’ I jumped to my feet and streaked towards him, sending my chair backwards on to the floor. Somehow I managed to overtake John on the narrow stairway and I leaped for the dangling receiver. ‘Mother! Did a letter come?’ ‘No, darling. No letter.’ ‘Oh...’ Bless her, but damn her too, why did she have to call if there was no letter? She must have known my heart had been in my throat all morning. She wants me to buy some

214 bloody salami or something... ‘No letter at all, I’m afraid,’ she said again. ‘Just a telegram.’ ‘A what?’ ‘A telegram.’ Who on earth could be sending me telegrams? Christ, maybe it had something to do with the court case. A new charge? A discrepancy in my statement. It was a whole year ago now, but these things could happen. ‘I’ll read it to you,’ said my mother, and then in her best and clearest for-foreigners- and-the-deaf voice, she enunciated: ‘Congratulations stop Awarded Scholarship Queens’ College stop Senior Tutor.’ ‘Read that again! Read that again!’ ‘Oh darling...’ she said with a sniff. ‘I’m so proud. I’m so proud!’ What did Paul Pennyfeather do? What did W. H. Auden do? It was the only thing to do. I emerged from London’s Green Park tube station two days later and strolled past the Ritz Hotel. Perhaps I should go in and say hello to Ron, tell him how useful his beloved Reitlinger had been in preparing me for the History of Art paper. Maybe later. My appointment was for eleven o’clock and it would not do to be even a second late. I passed Albany Court and peeped up, thinking of Jack and Ernest, Raffles and Bunny. Turning left into Sackville Street I searched the doorways until I saw the brass plaque I had been looking for: GABBITAS & THRING SCHOLASTIC AGENCY They wouldn’t spurn a good public school fellow, a Cambridge Scholar Elect. There must be a prep school out there somewhere in need of extra staff. In need of someone who knew the system and was prepared to step in at a moment’s notice to teach a little Latin, a little Greek, a little French, English and History. Someone who would muck in, referee a rugby match, help mount a play. A typical Uppingham product: a good, solid, all-round chap. I rang the bell. ‘Thrrrrring!’ I thought of the great whiskers and the Chapel. I thought of hurrying past those great whiskers to see where he might leave his briefcase in the colonnade. Had I really been caught in such a net of madness for so long? And was that stab I felt inside still a stab of longing? No, no. Surely not. My whole life spread out gloriously behind me. I knew how to work now. Preparing for the Cambridge Entrance exam I had read every Shakespeare play and written pages and pages of notes on each: scene breakdowns, character lists, cross references, everything. I knew how to concentrate. No need for Lentizol and constipation to keep me attentive. Was I exuberant? Was the spring back in the step? When I arrived at Cambridge I would be older than the others in my year. I would be twenty and they would be eighteen. Jo Wood, Matthew, all of those Uppingham friends, they had already left. I would be out





Microsoft Word - StephenFry-MoabIsMyWashpot.doc




215 of place amongst a milling crowd of youths who, pace Churchill, wanted to sow wild oats while all I wanted to do was grow sage. ‘Thrrrrring! Thrrrrring!’ ‘Wizzit?’ ‘Um, I have an appointment for eleven o’clock. To see a Mr Howard?’ ‘Gabbitas!’ The electric door latch snapped open with a triple clunk and I bounded up the stairs. No. I was Stephen. I was always going to be Stephen. I would always be that same maddening, monstrous mixture of pedantry, egoism, politeness, selfishness, kindliness, sneakiness, larkiness, sociability, loneliness, ambition, ordered calm and hidden intensity. I would cover my life with words. I would spray the whole bloody world with words. They were still all that I had but at last they were getting me places. Go and sin no more? I’m sorry, Mr Cromie, but there are sins out there I haven’t even heard of yet —not even me: clever-clogs, smart-arse, read-it-all, know-it-all, done-it-all, seen-it-all me. You bet I was fucking exuberant.

216 Afterword MOST HUMANS manage their path from cradle to crematorium without seeping their lives and the lives of their families all over perfect strangers. I suspect that everybody who ever does come to write an autobiography wants to borrow David Copperfield’s opening words. Whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life, or whether that situation will be held by anybody else, these pages must show. I suppose I am, according to Ihab Hassan’s definition, the anti-hero of my own life, with those ‘problems of estrangement and communion, sincerity and simulation, ambition and acquiescence ... clowning his sentimental way...’ If I am lucky I may be yet just halfway through the passage of my time on this earth. I shall be forty years old this very next weekend. Perhaps I shall be ready one day to write down some memories of the twenty years that have passed since I stood outside the offices of Gabbitas and Thring and asked for employment as a prep-school master. I know that my early life was at one and the same time so common as to be unremarkable, and so strange as to be the stuff of fiction. I know of course that this is how all human lives are, but that it is only given to a few of us to luxuriate in the bath of self- revelation, self-curiosity, apology, revenge, bafflement, vanity and egoism that goes under the name Autobiography. You have seen me at my washpot scrubbing at the grime of years: to wallow in a washpot may not be the same thing as to be purified and cleansed, but I have come away from this very draining, highly bewildering and passionately intense few months feeling slightly less dirty. Less dirty about the first twenty years of my life, at least. The second twenty, now that is another story... Stephen Fry — Norfolk, August 1997

217 Acknowledgements A PROBLEM THAT bedevils the autobiographer is that he cannot guess with any confidence whom he will offend by inclusion in his book and whom by exclusion. Some who have figured and continue to figure in my life may have felt greatly put out to see their names written down here, others will have been affronted by my negligence, ingratitude and forgetfulness in leaving them out. I must beg all who know me, or have known me, to believe that the foregoing unravelling of reminiscence is bound to contain inaccuracies, omissions and conflations: memory is a most inaccurate and unstable entity, and autobiography can never be the same thing as history. My own memory, often praised, is good for trivia games and for learning dramatic roles quickly, hopelessly unreliable with the dates and facts of my own life but, I think, dependable and honest when it comes to the recall of emotional states and atmospheres. I owe a great debt to Anthony Cromie, who was kind enough to write a letter that answered many of my questions about the lives and proper names of some of the Stouts Hill staff, any errors in those passages in the book are my own. That one piece of assistance and days of endless rummaging through my old scrapbooks and letters aside, I have allowed my memory and my memory alone to dictate every scene and situation. I have explained already within the book that some names have been changed: sometimes to protect the guilty and sometimes to protect the innocent. As always, Sue Freestone at Hutchinson’s was angelically patient as she awaited the final, overdue outchug from my printer; Lisa Osborne (no relation ...) and her calm, cheerful, brilliant, literate and knowledgeable copy-editing under the highest pressure were of indispensable assistance; Anthony Goff my literary agent remained a model of calm, kindly understanding and my sister Jo, who runs my life more efficiently and more sweetly than is credible, knows that were she not there I would be as a balsa twig in a tornado. She was no older than eleven at the time of my return from Pucklechurch so she does not feature here in much detail. In fact, my life could neither have been led nor written without her. My parents and my brother Roger may flinch at this book, this further example of the Stephenesque, as it used to be called within the family. They always taught me to be polite so, exhausted of further words, I can only say Sorry And Thank you.




THE STARS’





THE STARS’




THE STARS’

TENNIS BALLS

Stephen Fry

To M’ Colleague

?We are merely the stars’ tennis balls, struck and banded

Which way please them

John Webster, The Duchess of Malfi, Act V Scene 3

Set-Up

1

It all began some time in the last century, in an age when lovers wrote letters to each other sealed up in envelopes. Sometimes they used coloured inks to show their love, or they perfumed their writing-paper with scent.

41 Plough Lane,

Hampstead,

London NW3

Monday, June 2nd 1980

Darling Ned —

I’m sorry about the smell. I hope you ye opened this somewhere private, all on your own. You’ll get?teased to distraction otherwise. It’s called Rive Gauche, so I’m feeling like Simone de Beauvoir and I?hope you’re feeling like Jean-Paul Sartre. Actually I hope you aren’t because I think he was pretty horrid to her. I’m writing this upstairs after a row with Pete and Hillary. Ha, ha, ha! Pete and Hillary, Pete and Hillary, Pete and Hillary. You hate it when I call them that, don’t you? I love you so much. If you saw my diary you’d die. I wrote a whole two pages this morning. I drew up a list of everything that’s wonderful and glorious about you and one day when we re together for ever I might let you look at it and you’ll die again.

I wrote that you’re old-fashioned.

One: the first time we met you stood up when I entered the room, which was sweet, but it was the Hard Rock Café and I was coming out of the kitchen to take your order.

Two: every time I refer to my mum and dad as Peter and Hillary, you go pink and tighten your lips.

Three: when you first talked to Pete and — all right, I’ll let you off — when you first talked to Mum and Dad, you let them go on and on about private education and private health and how terrible it was and how evil the government is and you never said a word. About your dad being a Tory MP, I mean. You talked beautifully about the weather and incompre?hensibly about cricket. But you never let on.

That’s what the row today was about, in fact. Your dad was on Weekend World at lunchtime, you prolly saw him. (I love you, by the way. God, I love you so much.)

‘Where do they find them?’ barked Pete, stabbing a finger at the television. ‘Where do they find them?’

‘Find who?’ I said coldly, gearing up for a fight.

‘Whom,’ said Hillary.

‘These tweed-jacketed throwbacks,’ said Pete.

‘Look at the old fart. What right has he got to talk about the miners? He wouldn’t recognise a lump of coal if it fell into his bowl of Brown Windsor soup.

‘You remember the boy I brought home last week?’ I said, with what I’m pretty sure any observer would call icy calm.

‘Job security he says!’ Peter yelled at the screen. ‘When have you ever had to worry about job security, Mr Eton, Oxford and the Guards?’ Then he turned to me. ‘Hm? What boy? When?’

He always does that when you ask him a question — says something else first, completely off the subject, and then answers your question with one (or more) of his own. Drives me mad. (So do you, darling Neddy. But mad with deepest love.) If you were to say to my father, ‘Pete, what year was the battle of Hastings?’ he'd say, ‘They’re cutting back on unemployment benefit. In real terms it’s gone down by five per cent in just two years. Five per cent. Bastards. Hastings? Why do you want to know? Why Hastings? Hastings was nothing but a clash between warlords and robber barons. The only battle worth knowing about is the battle between...’ and he’d be off. He knows it drives me mad. I think it prolly drives Hillary mad too. Anyway, I persevered.

‘The boy I brought home,’ I said. ‘His name was Ned. You remember him perfectly well. It was his half term. He came into the Hard Rock two weeks ago.

‘The Sloane Ranger in the cricket jumper, what about him?’

‘He is not a Sloane Ranger!’

‘Looked like one to me. Didn’t he look like a Sloane Ranger to you, Hills?’

‘He was certainly very polite,’ Hillary said.

‘Exactly.’ Pete returned to the bloody TV where there was a shot of your dad trying to address a group of Yorkshire miners, which I have to admit was quite funny. ‘Look at that! First time the old fascist has ever been north of Watford in his life, I guarantee you. Except when he’s passing through on his way to Scotland to murder grouse. Unbelievable. Unbelievable.’

‘Never mind Watford, when did you last go north of Hampstead?’ I said. Well, shouted. Which was fair I think, because he was driving me mad and he can be such a hypocrite sometimes.

Hillary went all don’t-you-talk-to-your-father?-like-that-ish and then got back to her article. She’s doing a new column now, for Spare Rib, and gets ratty very easily.

‘You seem to have forgotten that I took my doctorate at Sheffield University,’ Pete said, as if that qualified him for the Northerner of the Decade Award.

‘Never mind that,’ I went on. ‘The point is Ned just happens to be that man s son.’ And I pointed at the screen with a very exultant finger. Unfortunately the man on camera just at that moment was the presenter.

Pete turned to me with a look of awe. ‘That boy is Brian Walden’s son?’ he said hoarsely. ‘You’re going out with Brian Walden’s son?’

It seems that Brian Walden, the presenter, used to be a Labour MP. For one moment Pete had this picture of me stepping out with socialist royalty. I could see his brain rapidly trying to calculate the chances of his worming his way into Brian Walden’s confidence (father-in-law to father-in-law) wangling a seat in the next election and progressing trium?phantly from the dull grind of the Inner London Education Authority to the thrill and glamour of the House of Commons and national fame. Peter Fendeman, maverick firebrand and hero of the workers, I watched the whole fantasy pass through his greedy eyes. Disgusting.

‘Not him!’ I said. ‘Him!’ Your father had appeared back on screen again, now striding towards the door of Number Ten with papers tucked under his arm.

I love you, Ned. I love you more than the tides love the moon. More than Mickey loves Minnie and Pooh loves honey. I love your big dark eyes and your sweet round bum. I love your mess of hair and your very red lips. They are very red in fact, I bet you didn’t know that. Very few people have lips that really are red in the way that poets write about red. Yours are the reddest red, a redder red than ever I read of, and I want them all over me right now — but oh, no matter how red your lips, how round your bum, how big your eyes, it’s you that I love. When I saw you standing there at Table Sixteen, smiling at me, it was as if you were entirely without a body at all. I had come out of the kitchen in a foul mood and there shining in front of me I saw this soul. This Ned. This you. A naked soul smiling at me like the sun and I knew I would die if I didn’t spend the rest of my life with it.

But still, how I wished this afternoon that your father were a union leader, a teacher in a compre?hensive school, the editor of the Morning Star, Brian Walden himself — anything but Charles Maddstone, war hero, retired Brigadier of the Guards, ex colonial administrator. Most of all, how I wish he was anything but a cabinet minister in a Conservative government.

That’s not right though, is it? You wouldn’t be you then, would you?

When Pete and Hillary both got it, they stared from me to the screen and back again. Hillary even looked at the chair you sat in the day you came round. Glared at the thing as if she wanted it disinfected and burned.

‘Oh, Portia!’ she said in what they used to call ‘tragic accents’.

Pete, of course, after going as red as Lenin, swallowed his rage and his baffled pride and began to Talk to me. Solemnly. He Understood my adolescent revolt against everything I had been brought up to cherish and believe. No, more than that, he Respected it. ‘Do you know, in a kind of way, I’m proud of you, Porsh? Proud of that fighting spirit. You’re pushing against authority and isn’t that what I’ve always taught you to do?’

‘What?’ I screeched. (I have to be honest. There s no other word. It was definitely a screech.)

He spread his hands and raised his shoulders with an infernal smugness that will haunt me till the day I die. ‘Okay. You’ve dated the upper-class twit of the year and that’s got your dad’s attention. You’ve got Pete listening. Let’s talk, yeah?’

I mean ...

I arose calmly, left the room and went upstairs for a think.

Well that’s what I should have done but I didn’t.

In fact I absolutely yelled at him. ‘Fuck you, Pete! I hate you! You’re pathetic! And you know what else? You’re a snob. You’re a hideous, contemptible snob!’ Then I stamped out of the room, slammed the door and ran upstairs for a cry. The President of the Immortals, in Aeschylean phrase, had finished his sport with Portia.

Poo. And more poo.

Anyway, at least they know now. Have you told your parents? I suppose they’ll hit the roof as well. Their beloved son ensnared by the daughter of Jewish left-wing intellectuals. If you can call a part-time history lecturer at North East London Polytechnic an intellectual, which in my book you can’t.

It wouldn’t be love without opposition, would it? I mean, if Juliet’s dad had fallen on Romeo’s neck and said, ‘I’m not losing a daughter, I’m gaining a son, and Romeo’s mum had beamed ‘Welcome to the Montague family, Juliet my precious,’ it would be a pretty short play.

Anyway, a couple of hours after this ‘distressing scene, Pete knocked on my door with a cup of tea. Precision, Portia, precision — he knocked on my door with his knuckles, but you know what I mean. I thought he was going to give me grief, but in fact —well no in fact he did give me grief. That is exactly and literally what he gave me. He had just had a phone call from America. Apparently Pete’s brother, my Uncle Leo, had a heart attack in New York last night and was dead by the time an ambulance arrived. Too grim. Uncle Leo’s wife Rose died of ovarian cancer in January and now he’s gone too. He was forty-eight. Forty-eight and dead from a heart attack. So my poor cousin Gordon is coming over to England to stay with us. He was the one who had to call the ambulance and everything. Imagine seeing your own father die in front of you. He’s the only child too. He must be in a terrible state, poor thing. I hope he’ll like it with us. I think he was brought up quite orthodox so what he’ll make of family life here, I can’t imagine. Our idea of kosher is a bacon bagel. I’ve never met him. I’ve always pictured him as having a black beard, which is insane of course, since he’s about our age. Seventeen going on eighteen, that kind of thing.

The result of the day is that peace has broken out in the Fendeman home and next week I shall have a brother to talk to. I’ll be able to talk about you.

Which, 0 Neddy mine, is more than you ever do. ‘Won a match. Played pretty well I think. Revising hard. Thinking about you a great deal.’ I quote the interesting bits.

I know you’re busy with exams, but then so am I. Don’t worry. Any letter that comes from you gives me a fever. I look at the writing and imagine your hand moving over the paper which is enough to make me wriggle like a love-sick eel. I picture your hair flopping down as you write, which is enough to make me writhe and froth like a ... like a ... er, I’ll come back to you on that one. I think of your legs under the table and a million trillion cells sparkle and fizz inside me. The way you cross a ‘t’ makes me breathless. I hold the back of my envelope to my lips and think of you licking it and my head swims. I’m a dotty dippy dozy dreadful delirious romantic and I love you to heaven.

But I wish wish wish you weren’t going back to your school next term. Leave and be free like the rest of us. You don’t have to go to Oxford, do you? I wouldn’t go to any university that made me stay on through the winter term after I’d already done all my A levels and all my friends had left, just to sit some special entrance paper. How pompous can you get?

Why can’t they behave like a normal university? Come with me to Bristol. We’ll have a much better time.

I shan’t bully you about it though. You must do whatever you want to do.

I love you, I love you, I love you.

I’ve just had a thought. Suppose your History of Art teacher hadn’t taken your class on a trip to the Royal Academy that Saturday? Suppose he had taken you to the Tate or the National Gallery instead? You wouldn’t have been in Piccadilly and you wouldn’t have gone to the Hard Rock Café for lunch and I wouldn’t be the luckiest, happiest, most dementedly in-love girl in the world.

The world is very... um... (consults the Thomas Hardy text-book that she’s supposed to be studying) ... the world is very contingent.

So there.

I’m kissing the air around me.

Love and love and love and love and love

Your Portia X

Only one X, because a quintillion wouldn’t be anything like enough.

7th June 1980

My darling Portia

Thank you for a wonderful letter. After your (com?pletely justified) criticism of my terrible style of letter-writing, this is going to be completely tricky. It just seems to gush out of you like a geezer (spelling?) and I’m not too hot at that kind of thing. Also your handwriting is completely perfect (like everything else about you of course) and mine is completely illegible. I thought of responding to your little extra (which was fantastic, by the way) by spraying this envelope with eau de cologne or aftershave, but I haven’t got any. I don’t suppose the linseed oil I use for my cricket bat would entice you? Thought not.

I’m so sorry you had a row with your family. Would it help at all if you were to tell Peter (there, I said it!) that I am completely poor? We never go abroad for holidays, it’s all my father can do to send me here and I know that it doesn’t sound very left wing or anything but he spends all the rest on travelling between London and his constituency and trying to stop our house from falling down. If I had any brothers or sisters, I’d probably (by the way, where on earth did you get ‘prolly’ from?) have to wear their hand-me-downs, as it is, I wear his. I’m the only boy in the school who goes around in cavalry twills and old hacking jackets on days when we don’t have to wear uniform. I even wear his old boater, which is almost orange with age, and the edge of the brim is chipped. When my mum was alive she genuinely used to darn socks for me, like some old Victorian. So my father may be a fascist (which I honestly don’t think he is) but he’s a completely poor one. Also, I told him that I met a girl in London and he was very pleased. He didn’t hit the roof at all when I said you had a Saturday job from school working as a waitress at a hamburger restaurant. In fact he said it sounded like you had some initiative. And as for the Jewish thing — he was very interested and wondered if your family were refugees from Hitler. He had something to do with the War Crimes in Nuremburg (berg?) and ... oh, anyway I’m not trying to say my father is better than yours — I thought your parents were really nice actually — it’s just that you don’t have to worry about him disapproving or anything. He can’t wait to meet you, and I can’t wait for you to meet him. Most people assume he’s my grandfather, because he’s older than most parents, if you know what I mean. He is a very good man I think, but I know I’m completely biased. Anyway, he’s all I have. My mother died when I was born. Didn’t I tell you before? My fault really. I was her first one and she was nearly fifty.

What terrible news about your uncle in America. I’m so sorry. I hope Gordon turns out to be a nice bloke. It’ll be great for you to have a brother at last. All my cousins are completely scary.

I just cannot wait for term to end. Thank God the last exam is over. I’ve been revising so hard that my head is bleeding, but I still don’t think I’ve done as well as I need to.

Boring school gossip, Number One: I’ve been made Head Boy.

Ta-ra!

We call it ‘Captain of School’ actually. Just for next term but I’ll be too busy revising for Oxford entrance for it to mean much. (More on that subject in a bit.) Anyway, by the time you get to my age all the glamour goes out of authority. It just becomes hard work and endless meetings with the headmaster and school monitors — we call prefects Monitors here, don’t ask me why.

Number Two: the Sailing Club is going to the west coast of Scotland this August. The master in charge has invited me along. For two weeks: the very same two weeks you and your family are going to Italy, so it’s the same two weeks we would have been away from each other anyway. For the rest of the time I’ll be staying in my father’s flat in Victoria and you’ll be there with me as much as possible I hope! Are you going to get a job at the Hard Rock again?

Anyway. Oxford. I can’t bear either that I’ve got to come back here in September while you’ll be as free as a bird. For two pins I’d forget the whole thing and apply to Bristol and be with you. It’s not that I’m really so stuck on Oxford, it’s just that I know it would break my father’s heart if I didn’t go. His great-great-grandfather was at St Mark’s and every Maddstone since. There’s even a quad named after us. You might think that would make it easier for me to get in, but actually it doesn’t work like that any more. I’ll actually have to do better in my entrance exam than virtually anyone, just to prove that I’ve got in on merit not on family name and connections. It would mean so much to him. I hope that doesn’t sound chronically pathetic. I’m his only son and I just know how much he’d love coming to visit me and walking round the colleges and pointing out his old haunts and so on.

I wish you could come and visit me here. Suppose next term I smuggle you in as a new boy? All you’ve got to do is squeak and look pretty, and you’re very good at that. No, not pretty — you re beautiful of course. The most beautiful thing I’ve ever seen or ever will see. (You are very good at squeaking though.)

I love your letters. I still can’t believe all this is true. Has it really happened to us? Other boys here have girlfriends too but I’m certain it’s not the same for them. They show their letters around and make a great show of drooling publicly over them. That must be a sign that it’s really no more than a joke to them.

And it isn’t a joke for us, is it?

You mention that strange thing about Fate and how it was that our school group was at the Royal Academy and how, if we hadn’t been, we probably wouldn’t have gone into the Hard Rock Café. That is such a completely weird thought. But then, when you came up to our table there were I think seven of us and why was it you looked twice at me? Apart from the fact that I’m such a moron that I was standing up.

I really hate to disillusion you on that, by the way, but it wasn’t politeness that made me stand up. I saw you and I stood up. It was like a sort of instinct. This must sound completely crazy — it was as if I had known you for ever. What’s more, if I think about it, I could swear that I knew you were going to come out of that swing door. I had been feeling funny all day. Feeling different if you know what I mean, and by the time we got into the restaurant after sweating around the gallery for two hours and walking half a mile down Piccadilly I just knew something was going to happen to me. And when you started coming towards us (you patted the front of your apron and checked your ear for a pencil in the funniest way — I can remember every detail of it) I just leapt to my feet. I nearly shouted out, ‘At last!’ and then you looked up into my eyes and we smiled at each other and that was it.

But you must have noticed the other boys there. Most of them surely taller and better looking than me? Ashley Barson-Garland was there, who’s twenty times funnier and twenty times brainier.

That reminds me ... I did something completely awful this morning, in Biology. It’s a bit complicated to describe and I feel awful about it. It’s not something for you to worry about, but it was odd. I read Barson-Garland’s diary. Part of it. I’ve never done anything like that before and I just don’t know what came over me. I’ll tell you all about it when we meet.

When we meet.

When we meet.

When we meet.

I just CANNOT stop thinking about you. All kinds of wicked things start happening to me.

Before I was born my father was a District Commissioner in the Sudan. I remember him telling me once that young men arriving from Britain used to go about in ironed khaki shorts and sometimes, if they happened across one of the beautiful Nubian women who went around bare-topped, or often entirely bare; they would have to turn and face the wall or just sit down on the ground there and then, where they were, to cover the fact, as my father puts it, ‘that they had become a little excited downstairs.' Well, just imagining you reading this letter, just knowing that these words will soon be in your eyes, that gets me a little excited downstairs. A lot excited downstairs.

So when I say that I’m thinking of you and thinking hard, you’ll know what I mean. Well, I’ve gone and made myself blush now. I adore you so much that I hardly know what to do with myself except laugh.

I love you to the power of everything, plus one.

Ned X

Ned never knew why he had done such a sly and terrible thing. Perhaps it was Fate, perhaps it was the Devil, in whom he believed sincerely.

He had slipped the book from Ashley Barson-Garland’s bag, dropped it onto his knees and opened the first page before he was even aware of what he was doing. His right hand lay on the desk and pretended every now and then to slide backwards and forwards through Advanced Cell Biology.

Lowering his eyes to his lap, he began to read.

It was a diary. He did not know what else he had imagined it might be. It looked at least four years old. He believed that it was its age that had first attracted him to it when he had seen it peeping from the bag. He had seen Ashley carry this book with him everywhere and that had intrigued him.

None the less it was very strange that he should have done such a thing. Ned did not like to think of himself as the kind of person who was interested in other people’s diaries.

It was difficult to read. Not the handwriting, which was very small, but clear and strong: Barson-Garland’s style was — how should one put it? — opaque. Yes, that was an intellectual’s word. The style was opaque.

With each line that Ned absorbed, the drowsy buzz of the classroom fell further and further away into the background, until he was entirely alone with the words and a vein that throbbed quick and guilty in his neck.

3rd May 1978

Didsbury

Firstly, it has to be the accent. If you get that right, you’re close to them. You’re halfway there. Not just the accent, mind, the whole delivery. Note the way the voice comes out of the mouth, note too the mouth’s limited aperture, the line of the lips, the angle of the head, the dipping of the head, the tilting of the head, the movement of the hands (hands, not arms, they are not Italians after all) and the direction of gaze.

Remember how there used to come a hot buzz of blood to your face on the bus every time you heard your name spoken by them? You believed for one heart-jump of a moment as they repeated and repeated your name that they were talking about you. You truly believed that inexplicably they must know you. They had recognised you as one of their own, displaced by some tragic turn of fate. The very first time on the bus, do you remember, they kept mentioning your name? Maybe you were going to be friends. How excited you were! They saw it in you. That thing you have. They spotted it. That indefin?able quality of difference.

Then you twigged. It wasn’t you they were talking about. They had no idea you existed. Theirs was another Ashley altogether. An amusing Ashley...

That’s SAY funny. Ashley.

Ashley. that’s a RAIL hoot.

Despite the initial bump of disappointment that had jolted you like an electric shock when you realised it wasn’t you they were talking about, it still gave you a little glow of pride and connection. Made you walk with a bit of a swing for a day or so, didn’t it? Maybe your name, the name you hated so much, the name that shamed you, that you had believed to be so middle class, maybe, if one of them shared it with you, maybe it was an all right name after all. Could it be that ‘Ashley’ was, in fact, upper middle class, or even — you never know — aristocratic?

Which one of them was Ashley, though? It was absurd, but you caught the name bandied so often that for a shining day or two you wondered whether they could all be Ashleys. Then you considered the possibility that Ashley might be a general name they used for ‘friend’, their counterpart of the ugly ‘mate’ that you heard every day in your concrete play?ground, just streets away from their stone quad?rangle? But then you twigged again.

There was no Ashley. Ashley did not exist. There was only an actually.

That’s so funny, actually. Actually, that’s a real hoot.

Can you actually, can you actually, Ashley, have ever really believed that they might have been talking about you? Did you seriously think that their lazy glances might actually, Ashley, have so much as taken you in? Sometimes your face may have been in the way of the arc of their gaze, but could you have truly believed that your identity, or even your face, ever actually, Ashley, registered?

Yet they registered on you. Oh, how they registered. You looked at their skin and their hair and wondered how it could be so different from our skin and hair. From ordinary people’s skin and hair. Was it a genetic gift? You noted the signature patch of flush on their cheeks, a hot scarlet, brighter by far than the dusty crimson bruise that stained the cheeks of the boys at your school. You noted too, on some, such pallor and translucence of complexion that you wondered if it might be their diet. Or the diets of their mothers while they still swam in the womb.

What burned into your mind most deeply of all of course, was the Flag. The Flag of the Blest. Their Flag. The flop. The flopping fringe. The fringe that flopped. The Flop Fringe Flag. And how it made you ache. What a great hole grew inside you when you gazed upon the Flag. Like a Frenchman, far from home, catching a whiff of Gauloise. Like an Englishman lost in Asia to whose ears there suddenly floats the opening music of The Archers. Because always, deep down, you did feel that their flag was really your flag too. If it weren’t for the terrible mistake. And the hole that grew in you, the great ache you felt was not envy, or covetousness. Actually, Ashley, it was loss, it was exile. You had been banished from your own, all on account of the Terrible Mistake.

And you only ever shared a bus with them, what, five times? Six at most. You watched them climbing aboard and swinging themselves to the back seat, sometimes a hand would push down on your headrest and the proximity of that hand to your head would send you dizzy and you would try to eat the air around you, so deep was your hunger for what they were. For what they had. Breaking rules, probably. Skipping into London out of school uniform. The beautiful, the ridiculous uniform of tail coats and striped trousers discarded in favour of sweaters and cords. The Flag flying, free to flop without constric?tion from boaters and top hats.

On the last day, the day before the Move North, you retrieved a boater from under the seat, didn’t you? He didn’t realise at first that he had come onto the bus wearing it. They teased him and laughing he had skimmed it down towards the driver in mock self-disgust. You nearly opened your mouth to tell him it was lodged under the seat in front of you as he passed on his way out, but you kept silent. Ashamed of your North London vowels. You retrieved the boater and you kept it. A shallow straw hat with a ribbon of blue. And afterwards you wore it, didn’t you? In your bedroom. You’re wearing it now. You are wearing it now, aren’t you, you cheap, you creepy, you sad... And it doesn’t work, does it? Your hair is too coarse to flop like a wild Tay salmon or a swatch of Savile Row suiting, your hair bristles, like a bog brush, like a suburban doormat. In fact, you aren’t wearing J. H. G. Etheridge’s boater (note the three initials ... class), J. H. G. Etheridge’s boater just happens to be On Your Head. Just as this diary is On The Table and this table is On The Floor. The floor isn’t wearing the table, the table isn’t wearing the diary. There’s a gulf, a great gaping gulf of difference. And it is this gulf, this gulf that... that’s why so often you jerk off into this straw hat, isn’t it? Isn’t it, you miserable lump of nothing?

How did the Terrible Mistake happen? The terrible series of mistakes.

How could your consciousness be the issue of his commonplace seed and her dull egg? Birth was the first terrible mistake. The transmigration of souls might explain such a mix-up on such a vast scale. In a previous incarnation you were one of them and now a trace memory lingers to torture you. You are a foundling perhaps, or the bastard by-blow of a ducal indiscretion, farmed off on these woeful people you are obliged to call your parents.

Firstly the name. Ashley. Ashley. ASHLEY. Write it and say it how you like, it just won’t do. There s a beery, panatella reek of travelling salesmen in tinted glasses and sheepskin car coats. Ashley is a PE teacher: Ashley says ‘Cheers, mate’ and ‘Wotcher, sunshine.’ Ashley drives a Vauxhall. Ashley wears nylon shirts and cotton/polyester mix trousers that are sold as ‘leisure slacks’. Ashley eats dinner at lunchtime and supper at dinnertime. Ashley says ‘toilet’. Ashley hangs fairy lights around the double-glazed window frames at Christmas. Ashley’s wife reads the Daily Mail and puts ornaments on the television. Ashley dreams of tarmac driveways. Ashley will never do anything in the world. Ashley is cursed.

Mum and Dad gave you that name.

Don’t say Mum and Dad.

Mama and Papa, with the emphasis on the final syllable. Mamah and Papah. Well, perhaps not. That might over-egg the pudding. (Note: Always pudding, never ‘dessert’ or, heaven help us, ‘sweet’ ...) ‘Mother’ and ‘Father’ is better.

Mother and Father gave you that name. And the criminal part of it is that, as a name, it’s only just off. Roy or Lee or Kevin or Dean or Wayne, they’re the real thing. Echt Lumpenproletariat. Dennis and Desmond and Leonard and Norman and Cohn and Neville and Eric are revolting, but they are honest. Ashley, though. It’s a Howard or a Lindsay or a Leslie kind of a name. It’s nearly there. It seems to be trying to be there. And that, surely, is the saddest thing of all.

Americans don’t have this trouble do they? With names and the implications of names. The one Ashley, in fact, who might be said to have had a touch of class was American. Ashley in Gone With the Wind. So classy that they called him Eshley. In the film, Leslie Howard never even tried to give him an American accent. Leslie and Howard. Two disgusting names for the price of one. But then Leslie Howard wasn’t English. He was Hungarian and to him no doubt, fresh off the boat, Leslie and Howard seemed posh.

The word ‘posh’ is right out. Unsayable.

But seemed. Seemed posh. There’s the rub. What people think is smart is so far from what actually, Ashley, is. You might think silver fish knives would be pretty bloody pukka, but fish knives of any kind are an absolute no. You might as well put doilies round them and abandon all hope of social pretension.

But it isn’t about social pretension. It’s about the ache.

Look, some males grow up with a feeling that they’re in the wrong body, don’t they? A woman trapped inside a man.

Isn’t it possible then that some people might grow up, as it were patricians imprisoned within plebeian bodies? Knowing, just knowing that they have been born into the wrong class?

But it isn’t about class. It’s about the hunger.

Oh but Ashley, you poor sap, can you actually believe that you’re supposed to be of their world? Don’t you know that it’s a world you can only be born into?

But that’s so unfair. If he wanted, a man can become American. He can become Jewish. He can, like Leslie Howard, make himself not just English but a symbol of all that England ever stood for. He can become a Londoner, a Muslim, a woman, a man or a Russian. But he can’t become a ... a ... nearly said gentleman there, didn’t you, but what is the word? An aristo, a nob, a public school toff... a one of them. You can’t become one of them, even if you feel yourself to be one of them in the deepest pit of you, even if you know in your innermost knowing self that it is your right, your destiny, your need and your duty. Even if you know that you could do it better. And that’s the truth. You would carry it off with so much more style. Carry off the ease that belies any sense of anything at all having to be carried off, if that isn’t too baroque. Carry off that natural, effortless taking-it-all-for-granted air. But the opportunity has been denied you because of the terrible mistake of your birth.

The Move North, that was another nail in the coffin. Another element of the Terrible Mistake. Your dad died and Mum got a job teaching at a deaf school in Manchester. Dad had been an officer. In the RAF, it grieves you to admit, not in a smart army regiment. He never flew, so there was no romance to him. But at least he had been an officer. Be honest now, he was compelled to enter the service as a humble Aircrafts?man. He wasn’t ever officer class. He had to work his way up through the ranks and Lord that burns you up, doesn’t it? Then he died of complications from diabetes, a rather bourgeois, not to say proletarian disease, and you, your mum and your sister Carina moved north. (Carina! Carina, for God’s sake! What kind of name is that? All very well to say that the Duke of Norfolk has a daughter called Carina. There’s a world of difference between saying, ‘Have you met the Lady Carina Fitzalan-Howard?’ and ‘This is Carina Garland.’) You moved away from Old Harrow and the proximity of them, their tail-coats, top-hats, blazers and boaters. You were twelve years old. Slowly you have become infected by a northern accent. Not obvious, just a trace, but to your sensitive, highly attuned ears as glaring as a cleft palate. You began to pronounce ‘One’ and ‘None’ to rhyme with ‘Shone’ and ‘Gone’ instead of ‘Shun’ and ‘Gun’, you gently sounded the g’s in ‘Ringing’ and

‘Singing’. At school you even rhyme ‘Mud’ with ‘Good’ and ‘Grass’ with ‘Lass’. Fair enough, you would be beaten up as a southern poof otherwise, but you have trailed some of that linguistic mud into the house with you. Not that your mum noticed.

And then this afternoon happened.

She brought some of her deaf kids home for tea this afternoon. After they had gone you said that good God, they even signed in a Mancunian accent. You thought it a good joke. Mum bridled and called you a snob. That was the first time the word was ever said openly. It hung in the air like a fart in a teashop. I pretended not to hear, but we knew that something deep was up because we both blushed and swallowed. I made a fuss of doing up my shoe-laces, she became fascinated by the teapot lid.

And I came up and started to write this and... ah. I’ve gone into the first person. I have said ‘I’.

Never mind, all this will be past history soon. Watch out, I am about to join them. I am on my way in. And there’s nothing they can do to stop me. I’m smarter than they are and braver and better too. I am prepared for every paper and they will not be able to refuse me.

But I must be prepared for the wider scholarship. The scholarship that counts. The scholarship of life, if I may be so sententious. I shall add my mother’s maiden name of Barson. Why not? They have been doing it for years. I shall be Barson-Garland. It has a ring, I think. Damn it, I could triple-barrel myself. Barson-Barson-Garland, how would that be? A little too much, I think. But Barson-Garland I like. It palliates the Ashley, makes it almost tolerable.

But firstly, there must come the accent. When I arrive, the accent will be in place and they will never know. I have my exercises all written out:

Don’t say good, say gid.

Don’t say post, say paste

Don’t say real, say rail

Don’t say go, say gay

Don’t say —

The outer door to the biology room banged and Ned looked up to see the top of Ashley’s head in the window of the inner door. He slammed the diary shut, pushed it hurriedly back into the bag and hunched himself quickly over his Advanced Cell Biology, both fists pressed hard against his cheeks, hair flopping down like a thick silk curtain.

He was in this attitude of intense study when Barson-?Garland resumed his place next to him. Ned looked up and smiled. He hoped that the pressure from his fists would explain any heightened flush.

‘What was all that about?’ he whispered.

‘Nothing of great interest,’ said Barson-Garland. ‘The headmaster wants me to make the Speech Day Oration.’

‘Bloody hell, Ash! That’s completely brilliant.’

‘It’s nothing... nothing.’

Barson-Garland had rhymed the first ‘nothing’ with ‘frothing’ and then quickly corrected himself. Ned tried hard to look as if he hadn’t noticed. Half an hour ago he wouldn’t have noticed. His hand moved to Ashley’s shoulder in a sudden surge of warmth and friendship.

‘Bloody proud of you, Ash. Always knew you were a genius.’

Dr Sewell’s high croak intruded. ‘If you have absorbed all that information and have nothing better to do than gossip, Maddstone, then no doubt you will be able to come forward to the blackboard and label this chloroplast for me.’

‘Righto, sir.’ Ned sighed cheerfully and sent Barson-Garland a rueful smile over his shoulder as he went up.

Barson-Garland was not smiling. He was staring at a dried, pressed four-leaf clover on Ned Maddstone’s stool. The same four-leafed clover that had lain undisturbed between the pages of his private journal for three years.

A heavy knock came on the door of Rufus Cade’s study. After twenty seconds of oath and panic, Cade hurled himself into his armchair, gave a frenzied look about the room and, satisfied that all was clear, shouted a ‘Come in!’ that he hoped mingled relaxedness with boredom.

The sardonic face of Ashley Barson-Garland appeared around the door.

‘Oh, it’s you.

‘None other.’ Ashley sat himself down and watched with amused disdain as Cade thrust half his body out of the window and spat mints from his mouth like a passenger heaving over the side of a ferry.

‘A charming lavender fragrance seems to be pervading the room,’ said Ashley, picking up an aerosol room spray from the desk and inspecting it with benevolent amusement.

Cade, still leaning over the sill, had started to scrabble at the flower-bed beneath his window. ‘You might have said it was you.

‘And deny myself the pleasure of this pantomime?’

‘Very fucking funny...’ Cade straightened himself up holding a battered but expertly rolled joint, from which he began gently to flick away fragments of leaf-mould.

Ashley watched with pleasure. ‘So delicate. Like an archaeologist brushing soil from a freshly unearthed Etruscan vase.

‘I’ve got a bottle of Gordon’s too,’ said Cade. ‘Maddstone paid back the five quid he owed me, would you believe?’

‘Yes I would believe. I happened to see his proud daddy slipping him a tenner just before the match this afternoon.’

Cade took a Zippo from his pocket. ‘What, reward for being made Head Pig next term?’

‘Such, I would imagine, is the case. Reward too for being captain of cricket and for breaking the school batting record. For being winsome and good and sweet and kind. For being —'

‘You don’t like him, do you?’ Cade drew in a huge lungful of smoke and offered the joint to Ashley.

‘Thank you. It is my belief that you don’t like him either, Rufus.’

‘Yeah. Well, you’re right. I don’t.’

‘Nothing to do with the fact that he didn’t select you for the first eleven?’

‘Fuck that,’ said Cade. ‘Couldn’t give a toss about that. He’s just ... he’s a prick, that’s all. Thinks he’s God almighty. Arrogant.’

‘So few would agree with you there. I fancy it is the general view of the school that our Nedlet is unflaggingly and endearingly modest.’

‘Yeah. Well. He doesn’t fool me. He acts like he’s got everything.’

‘Which he has.’

‘Apart from money,’ said Cade with relish. ‘His father is dirt poor.

‘Yes,’ said Ashley, quietly. ‘Dirt poor.

‘Not that there’s anything wrong with that,’ Cade added with tactless haste. ‘I didn’t mean to say... I mean, money isn’t ... you know ...

‘Isn’t everything? I often wonder about that.’ Ashley spoke clearly and coolly, as he always did when angry, which was often. Anger fed him and clothed him and he owed it much. Cade’s clumsiness had pricked him hard, but he used the rage to let his mind fly. ‘Shall we formulate it this way? Money is to Everything, as an Aeroplane is to Australia. The aeroplane isn’t Australia, but it remains the only practical way we know of reaching it. So perhaps, metonymically, the aeroplane is Australia after all.’

‘Gin then?’

‘Why not?’ From vexation to amusement, at speed. Ashley found it very hard to stay angry with a species as low down the evolutionary ladder as a Cade.

‘Your oration was ... it was amazing,’ Cade said, handing Ashley a bottle and a glass tumbler. Ashley noticed that the bottle was half empty while Cade already appeared to be more than half full.

‘You liked it?’

‘Well it was in Latin, wasn’t it? But, yeah. Sounded good.’

‘We aim to please.’

‘Want to stick some music on?’

‘Some music?’ Ashley scrutinised Cade’s proudly filed stack of records with a fastidious and entirely self-conscious disgust. ‘But you don’t appear to have any. I mean what, for example, is a Honky Chateau? A castle filled with geese? A claret that makes you vomit?’

‘Elton John. It’s years old. You must have heard of it —shit!’

A gentle, loose-knuckled knock on the door brought Cade bolt upright. Before he had time to embark once more upon his Colditz routine, Ned Maddstone had entered the room.

‘Oh gosh, sorry. Didn’t mean to... Hey, for goodness’ sake, don’t worry. I’m not ... I mean bloody hell, it’s almost the end of term. Carry on please. I just...

‘Come in, Ned, we’re just, you know, having a bit of a celebration,’ said Cade, standing up.

‘Wow, that’s really kind, but actually.., well, I’m going off to have dinner with my father. He’s staying at the George. Thought you might be here, B-G, and I wondered if you wanted to come along? Er, both of you. Obviously. You know, last night of term and everything.’

Ashley smiled to himself at the awkward inclusion of Rufus.

‘That’s really kind,’ Rufus was saying, ‘but you know. I’m a bit hammered actually. Don’t think I’d be much use. Probably embarrass you, as a matter of fact.’

Ned turned anxiously to Ashley. ‘Unless you’re doing anything else, Ash?’

‘I should be honoured, Ned. Truly honoured. Will you let me go upstairs and change into something a little more vespertine?’ He pointed mournfully at his speech day garb. ‘You go on ahead. I shall join you at the George if I may.'

‘Great. Great. That’s great,’ said Ned grinning happily. ‘Okay then. And Rufus, till August, then?’

‘I’m sorry?’

‘You are coming on Paddy’s school trip?’

‘Oh. Yeah,’ said Cade. ‘Sure. Absolutely.’

‘I’ll see you in Oban, then. Can’t wait. Right. Okay then. Good.’

There was a silence in Cade’s study after Ned had backed himself out of the room. As if the sun had been blotted out, thought Ashley with great bitterness.

That he, Ashley Barson-Garland, should be patronised by this brainless, floppy-haired, goody-two-shoed, squeaky-clean, doe-eyed, prefect-perfect, juicy-fruity piece of— He saw it, of course, Ashley saw it quite clearly in Ned’s eyes. The sorrowful apology. The friendly sympathy. Ned was too stupid to know that he knew. If anyone else, anyone else in the school had read his diary, they would have teased him, mobbed him to hell, spread it all over the school. Ashley wasn’t popular, he was fully aware of that. He wasn’t one of them. He sounded right, but he wasn’t one of them. He sounded too right. These cretinous sons of upper-class broodmares and high-pedigreed stallions, they were loutish and graceless, entirely undeserving of the privilege accorded them. He, Ashley Barson-Garland, stood apart because he wasn’t enough of an oik. Such splendid irony. But, since it was Ned who had stolen a look into his diary, Ashley’s secrets were safe.

Yet, no secret is ever safe when another has possession of it, Ashley told himself. It was intolerable to imagine his life, any part of his life, having a separate existence inside another person’s head.

His mind considered the possibility that he had left his bag open beside Ned deliberately. When the message had come that the Headmaster wanted to see him, why had he not taken the bag with him? He was certain that he had never been so lax with his diary before. In the first place he almost never carried it around the school. It was always safely locked up inside the desk in his study. It must be noted too that Biology was the only lesson he took in which he sat next to Ned. Did he therefore want Ned to read it? Ashley shook himself out of this spurious cul-de-sac. Cheap psychological guesswork would get him nowhere. More to the point was this question: which pages had Maddstone read? Ned being Ned, Ashley reasoned, he would have started at the beginning. It was impossible that he had got very far. Speed-reading was not one of his accomplishments.

What would Ned have done next? Prayed probably. Ashley wanted to snort at the very idea of it. Yes, Ned would have gone to the chapel, fallen to his knees and prayed for guidance. And what manner of guidance would have been offered by Ned’s shining auburn-haired shampoo-commercial Christ? ‘Go thou and hold Ashley to you as a brother. My son Ashley is frightened and filled with self-hatred. Go thou then and may the kindness and love of God shine upon his countenance and make him whole.’

Sympathy. Ashley’s whole body tightened. He wanted to bite Ned’s throat open. Wanted to pull the veins and nerves out with his teeth and spit them over the floor. No, that was wrong. That wasn’t it at all. He didn’t want that. That was a scenario that only ended in Ned’s martyrdom. Ashley wanted something far more perfect. He was feeling a new anger that he had some difficulty in identifying at first. It was hatred.

Cade had finished up the gin. ‘You’re not really going to have dinner with his parents are you?’ he asked.

‘Going? Certainly I am going,’ said Ashley sweetly.

‘Don’t think he wanted to invite me,’ said Cade. ‘Cunt.’ He banged a fist into the arm of his chair, sending up a puff of dust. ‘I mean, what the fuck did I stand up for? Like he’s a master or something. He acts so fucking straight. What a typocritical turd.’

‘Typocritical?’ said Ashley. ‘I like that. Typocritical. You surprise me sometimes, Rufus.’

‘Another toke?’ Cade proffered a half inch of joint. ‘I meant hypocritical.’

‘No, you didn’t. You may think you did, but your brain knew better. You can’t have failed to read The Psychopathology of Everyday Speech, surely?’

‘Bollocks,’ said Cade.

Ashley rose. ‘Well, I had better be going up to change. What a joy to get out of this confining nonsense.

This was a lie. Ashley rarely felt more joy than when dressed in the Sunday uniform of striped trousers, tailcoat and top hat.

‘Arsehole,’ said Cade. ‘Fucking fucking arsehole.’

‘Why thank you, dear.’

‘No, not you. Maddstone. Who the fuck does he think he is?’

‘Quite,’ said Ashley, leaving. ‘Sweet dreams.’

‘Mind you,’ Rufus Cade rumbled to himself, leaning back in his armchair as the door closed. ‘You’re an arsehole too, Ashley Bastard-Garland. let’s face it, we’re all arseholes. Ow!’ He had burnt his bottom lip on the last thin quarter inch of joint. ‘All arseholes, except Ned fucking Maddstone. Which makes him,’ he reasoned to himself, ‘the biggest arsehole of all.’

Pete and Hillary were wearing the insufferably smug look they always assumed when they had made love the previous night. Portia tried to cancel out its atmosphere by moving around the kitchen with extra noise and impatience, banging drawers so loudly that the cutlery inside resonated and jingled like a gamalan. Fierce Tuscan sunlight streamed through the window and lit the big central table where Pete was slitting large batons of bread.

‘This morning,’ he said, ‘we shall feast on prosciutto and buffalo mozzarella. There’s cherry jam, there’s apricot jam and Hills is brewing up some coffee.’

‘We have feasted on exactly the same things every morning since we got here,’ said Portia sitting herself down with a glass of orange juice.

‘I know. Isn’t it wonderful? Hills and I were up early this morning and we went into the village for fresh bread. Smell that. Go on. No, go on.’

‘Pete!’ Portia pushed the proffered loaf away.

‘Someone got out of bed the wrong side this morning

Portia looked at her father. He wore an unbuttoned batique shirt, an elephant hair bracelet, wooden sandals and, she saw with a shudder, tight maroon swimming trunks that emphasised every bulge and curve of his genitals.

‘For God’s sake —‘ she began, but was interrupted by the sleepy, shuffling entrance of her cousin.

‘Aha!’ said Pete cheerfully. ‘It’s awake. It’s awake and needs feeding.’

‘Well hi there!’ said Hillary who had developed the strange habit of going slightly American whenever she spoke to Gordon. This also drove Portia mad.

‘So what’s up?’ Gordon said, moving a shopping bag from the seat next to Portia and sitting down.

‘Well now,’ said Hillary brightly, as she set down a coffee jug between them, ‘Pete and I were thinking of maybe checking out the palio.’

‘Its been and gone, Hillary,’ said Portia with the exasperated air of one addressing a child. ‘We met that family who’d seen it last week, remember? A rider fell off his horse right in front of them and there was a bone sticking out of his leg. Even you can’t have forgotten that.’

‘Ah, but there’s more than one palio in Italy, precious,’ said Pete. ‘Lucca has its very own palio this evening. Not as spectacular or dangerous as Siena, but rather fun they tell me.’

‘Lucca?’ said Gordon through a mouthful of bread. ‘Where’s Lucca?’

‘Not too far,’ Pete replied, pouring coffee into a large bowl to which he added hot milk. Fragments of skin floated to the top. Looking at them made Portia want to retch. ‘I wanted to go there anyway. It’s the olive oil capital of the world, they say. You can watch it being pressed. I thought we might swim and read this morning, then make our way slowly there, driving by the local roads and lunching somewhere in the hills. How’s that for a plan?’ Skin from the coffee clung to his moustache. Portia had never felt so ashamed of him. How Hillary could suffer such a thing on top of her had always been something of a puzzle. Now that she knew there was such a man as Ned in the world, it took on the qualities of an eternal cosmic mystery.





THE STARS’




‘Sounds good to me,’ said Gordon. ‘Sound good to you, Porsh?’

‘Completely.’

Portia stopped herself from shrugging moodily. She didn’t mind behaving like a spoiled adolescent in front of her parents, but in front of Gordon she preferred to look more sophisticated. What she really wanted to say was, ‘So we’re going to arrive at Lucca in time to find all the shops and cafés shut, are we? And as usual we’re going to have to wander around a completely empty and deserted town for five hours until everyone else has woken from their siestas. That’s a great plan, Pete.’

Instead she contented herself with remarking, ‘Arnolfini was from Lucca.’

‘How’s that?’ said Gordon.

'There’s a painting by van Eyck,’ said Portia, ‘called The Arnolfini Marriage. Arnolfini, the man in the painting, was from Lucca. He was a merchant.’

‘Yeah? How d’you know something like that?’

‘I don’t know, I must have read it somewhere.’

‘I never studied art history.’

Portia realised that saying ‘Neither did I, you don’t have to “study” something to know about it,’ would sound arrogant, so once again, she curbed her tongue. Really, she was becoming insufferably intolerant these days. And she liked Gordon. She liked his quiet acceptance of the terrible things that had happened to him. He seemed to like her too and it is very easy, she thought, to like someone who likes you. That wasn’t vanity, that was practical common sense.

‘Aha, methinks I hear the musical rattle of a Fiat,’ said Pete, head cocked in the direction of the driveway, ‘bearing, perchance, dispatches from England.’

Portia jumped up. She forgave herself her moodiness.

As a junkie needs a fix, so had she been needing a letter. ‘I’ll go,’ she said. ‘I need to practise my Italian on him.’

Hillary called after her. ‘Porsh, you know your results won’t be coming through for at least another week! Besides, Mrs Worrell said she would telephone us here if anything arrived that looked like it might be from the examination board...’

But Portia was already out of the house and stepping into the harsh whiteness of day. Never mind exam results. Never mind anything. A letter from Ned, let there be a letter from Ned.

‘Buongiorno, Signor Postino!’

‘Buongiorno, ragazza mia.'

‘Come va, questo giorno?’

‘Bene, grazie, bene. £ lei?’

‘Anche molto bene, mule grazie. Um ... una lettra per mi?’

‘Momento, momentino, Signorina. Eccola! Ma solamente una carta. Mi dispiace, cara mia.’

A postcard, only a postcard. She fought back her disappointment and took it with trembling hands. He was sailing, she told herself. A letter would be difficult. Besides, looking at the postcard with a growing sense of delight, she saw that he had covered it in the tiniest script he could manage and even put the address of the villa in bright red ink so that it stood out against the minuscule blue handwriting which wormed around almost every square millimetre of the card. He had even managed to weave narrow threads of words between the lines of the address, she saw. It was better than a letter. To see how much care he had taken. A thousand times better. She was so full of delight and love that she almost broke into sobs.

‘Ciao, bella!’

‘Ciao, Signor Postino!’

She turned the card over and looked at the photograph on the front, shielding her eyes from the reflective dazzle. A small fishing port glittered in a softer sunlight than the one that glared down on her now. ‘The Harbour, Tobermorey’ the caption read in old-fashioned yellow cursive letters. The photograph looked as if it might have been taken in the nineteen-fifties. There was a small Morris Minor van parked on the quayside. Then Portia noticed that amongst the jostling crowd of fishing boats there was a little yacht there, hand drawn in red ink. A nervous smile and eyes had been sketched in on its hull, giving it the frightened look that Thomas the Tank Engine adopted when he was squeezed between the big scowling locomotives. An arrow pointed down to the boat from the sky and across the top was written, ‘The pirate ship “Nedlet” lies pining at anchor.’

‘News from lover boy?’ Gordon had come out into the sunshine with The World According to Carp and a cup of coffee. He sat himself on a lounger in front of the terrace that ran round the front of the villa and looked up at Portia through dark sunglasses.

She nodded, not trying to disguise her happiness. Gordon crossed his right arm over his chest and scratched his left shoulder-blade. The compressed skin in the V of his elbow, cradled in his chin as he scratched, looked tanned almost to black. When he straightened out his arm again the effect was gone.

‘He’s sailing, right?’

‘In Scotland.’

‘I never been on a sailboat.’

‘Nor me. I’m sure I’d be completely sick.’ Portia had started using the word ‘completely’ a lot recently. Ned peppered his letters with it, and she thought of it as his word. Saying it was like wearing an old shirt of his and made her comfortable and proud.

‘Uh-huh,’ Gordon nodded seriously as if she had said a profound and interesting thing. Then he picked up a bottle of Hawaiian Tropic tanning oil. ‘You want to rub some of this on me?’

‘Okay...

Portia put down the postcard and took the bottle.

‘I’ll turn around here and you can do my back.’

A wave of coconut arose from the palms of her hands as she rubbed them together. She noticed, smoothing oil over his skin, that Gordon had silvery filaments of hair growing in the small of his back, feathered and whorled like a wheat field after a storm, while darker hairs snaked along his shoulders from the base of the neck. She could feel their slight roughness under her hands. His chest was already dense with tight curly black hairs and his beard line heavier than Pete’s who was more than twice his age. She wondered why this might be. It wasn’t an ethnic thing. Pete was no less Jewish than Gordon. Perhaps it was something to do with the English climate. She thought of Ned and how proudly he had announced that he was ‘going to have a bash’ at growing a moustache over the summer.

Portia poured a small puddle of oil into the hollow at the base of Gordon’s back. Ned was strong, but she did not think he had muscles that were packed as hard and tight under the skin as Gordon’s. Every afternoon Gordon had gone into a routine of press-ups, pull-ups and sit-ups in the shade of the paved courtyard behind the villa, to Pete’s apparent amusement and Hillary’s poorly feigned lack of interest. Portia had watched Hillary watching from the kitchen and Pete had watched Portia watch Hillary watching and Portia knew that Pete had been thinking about his own drooping flab and evolving a socio-political explanation that would justify and ennoble it.

In New York Gordon played regularly on his school’s tennis and lacrosse teams. He had been outraged to learn that in England lacrosse was a game played almost exclusively by girls in private schools. ‘He’s quite right,’ Ned had told Portia in a letter. ‘Lacrosse is a very hard, tough and physical game. It would scare me stiff. That’s why I think it is much better left to you girls.’

Portia smiled as she contemplated the future. She pictured the days when she would be able to rub sun tan lotion on Ned’s back on holidays yet to come in places yet to be imagined. It was strange, she thought, that she didn’t yet know his body. She had never seen him in shorts or swimming trunks. She had never seen him naked. Once, when they had kissed, she had felt something push against her thigh. A hot rush of blood spread across her face at this memory and she giggled inside herself as she recalled the naivety with which she had originally supposed him to have had something in his pocket. Perhaps next week, in his father’s flat they would go upstairs together. Perhaps —‘Where is “The Harbour, Tobermorey” ?‘

‘Hey!’ Portia snatched the card from Gordon’s hands. ‘That’s private! Oh no!’

Portia looked down in horror. Her oily thumb had smeared across the card obliterating a whole trail of Ned’s careful writing.

‘No!’ she wailed. ‘It’s ruined! Ruined! How could you! You, you fucker!’

‘Hey, I’m sorry. I was only —‘

Portia ran into the house, tears springing from her eyes. Gordon watched her go, shrugged and rearranged his khaki shorts to alleviate the discomfort of a pressing erection.

Gordon wondered if it was the fact of her being in love that awoke such a flood of desire within him. He considered that he might be just as much in love himself, only where he came from the phrase ‘got the hots for’ was more acceptable. Even most British kids, he had noticed, would rather say ‘I fancy her’ than ‘I love her.

The way Portia confided in him so instantly on his arrival in London had done more to disorient him than the strange food, incomprehensible accents and bewildering geography of the place. He had expected from the British Fendemans more of the chilly reticence and uptight reserve that his father used to talk about when explaining the irrefutable logic of his leaving England for America. Portia’s directness not only confused Gordon, it needled him too. It was as if her emotions were more profound than anyone else’s. Her very ability to describe them so freely and expressively stopped him from being able to say anything open and honest about himself and he hated that. He had feelings too and right now he felt like he wanted to take this virgin, lay her in a bed and fuck her till her eyes popped out.

That was the crazy injustice of it. She had painted him so far into a corner that the only territory left him was that of a predatory animal. It was so totally unfair. He wasn’t like that. He was a good man, a feeling man with a feeling man s heart. He could be charming. He could be romantic. But she gave him no chance to be. Mr Wonderful, Mr Perfect absorbed her whole being. Gordon could see in her eyes that whenever she responded warmly to him she was really responding to Ned. By talking about him so much she had planted the faggoty English goy asshole right inside his head. It was like he was the host to a parasite, and the parasite’s name was Ned Maddstone.

If his mother and father had died a year earlier, Gordon would have met Portia just at the moment she was ready to give her whole being to someone. But he had been just too late. By the time he arrived the door was already closed to him. That’s why now he felt like he wanted to batter it down and splinter it into pieces. All he had needed was to have been given a chance. The chance to knock gently and have her open up, but instead the door was locked against him and the key had been turned by Ned Maddstone.

Ned fucking Maddstone.

Gordon did not think of himself as a bad man, but he knew that lately he had been having bad thoughts. He had stopped being able to think of the shock of seeing his father tumble in a heap to the ground in front of him, roaring in pain and clutching at his throat. He had lost any sense of his mother, retaining only the memory of his suffocating desire to get out of the hospital and into the open air, away from that thin, yellow-skinned woman with a tube up her nose and a frightened look in her eyes.

He had considered his new situation on the flight over.

‘One, these guys are atheists,’ he had said to himself. ‘Saturdays, I won’t have to go to synagogue. Two, they’re anti-Zionist. I won’t be forced to go on kibbutz August. Three, they’re British, I won’t have to talk about my “feelings” like I did after Mom died. Four, these guys are obscenely rich. Aunt Hillary’s family were multi?millionaire retailers or something, so I won’t be in that shotgun shit-hole in Brooklyn. I’ll have a car. We’ll vacation twice a year. Barbados and Hawaii.’

But oh no...

‘This will be your bicycle. We don’t believe in cars.

‘E. P. Thompson is delivering a lecture on Cultural Imperialism to the Fabian Society, we’ve forty-five minutes to get there.’

‘We booked a villa in the Tuscan hills. Porsh wants to see the Duccios in Siena and Hills is collecting material for her next novel.’

‘Gordon, let’s consider how you feel about Rose and Leo’s death, yeah?’

‘You’ll enjoy it! CND marches are always good fun. And they’re making a difference too.'

What a fucking joke. But worst of all was ...

‘I’ve got this boyfriend...’

‘His name is Ned ...

‘There! That’s him, sitting in the middle, holding a cricket ball ...’

‘Look, Gordon! He’s done a drawing of himself bored in the middle of a French lesson...’

‘Look at that smile...’

‘Look, another letter already...’

‘Look...’

Ned fucking Maddstone.

Ned leant over the Orphana’s gunwale and felt the spray fly up into his face. The sea glistened like wet coal under a sky heavy with stars. It was Ned’s private ocean tonight. Below, the school sailing instructor Paddy Leclare and the five other boys on the trip were asleep in their berths. When it had become clear that, because of the extra hours spent in the Giant’s Causeway, they were going to have to sail back to Scotland through the night, Ned had offered himself at once for this watch. In the past he might have done so out of duty or good citizenship, but Ned knew that he had volunteered on this occasion because he so relished time alone with himself, time to think about Portia and time simply to take pleasure in being. On nights like these, in a good boat running free, a person could imagine himself the king of the world. On land, it seemed to Ned, man was always inferior to the animals and disconnected from nature. Cars and machines might be clever, but they bullied the natural world. At sea, man was using nature, but not using nature up. He would put this point in his next letter to Portia. Love was turning him into something of a philosopher. The clever ones, Ashley Barson-Garland for instance, would think him immeasurably stupid, but then Ashley might not understand that Ned liked being a little stupid. It was sometimes a comfortable thing to be. After all, Ashley’s cleverness was no kind of solace to him. In fact it seemed to make him deeply unhappy. Unhappiness to Ned, especially in his present condition of unassailable elation, was an incomprehensible and alien thing to afflict a fellow human, like acne or bad hand-eye co-ordination. He knew there were people who suffered from these plights, but he could only wonder why they didn’t snap themselves out of it and have more fun.

To be a lover was to be part of a group singled out by fate for special attention. Ned had never imagined that he might have possessed such pleasure in simply being himself. His skill at sport, his good looks, his easy-going nature, his popularity — he would never for a moment think of those with satisfaction — if anything they were sources of embarrassment. His being a Lover though, a Lover with the most capital of Ls, made him burst with so much pride he could scarcely recognise himself. He wondered for the millionth time if Portia really felt the same. Perhaps her feelings were stronger. Perhaps his were stronger. Perhaps she imagined that hers were stronger and would never believe how strong —A sudden sound from below made him turn in surprise. ‘Maddstone!’

Peering astern Ned made out the shape of a head appearing in the hatchway.

‘Hello?’ he called into the darkness. ‘Who is it?’

‘Maddstone, you’ve got to come below.’

‘Rufus? Is that you?’

‘There’s something wrong with Paddy. He’s been making weird noises.’

Ned leapt to the hatch and scrambled down into the galley.

Lit by nothing more than a single tile-lamp and the glow of the radio set, Paddy Leclare’s body was slumped forward in his chair, face down over the charts.

Ned approached him softly. ‘Skipper?’

‘Is he dead?’ whispered Cade.

‘I can’t tell,’ said Ned, stretching out a hand to Leclare’s neck. ‘Skipper! Paddy! Are you all right?’ He felt a bumping pulse beneath his fingertips and breathed a sigh of relief.

Leclare suddenly gave a great cough and started to struggle upright. Ned was shocked to see a long trail of bloody saliva suspended between his mouth and the chart table.

‘Is that you Ned? Is it you?’

‘Yes, skipper, it’s me. Is everything all right?’

‘Ah, well now, I wouldn’t say that ... who’s that with you?’ Leclare stared over Ned’s shoulder, a look of fright in his eyes.

‘Sir, it’s only Rufus, sir.’

‘Rufus, that you there?’

‘Yes, skipper.’

Leclare’s breath came in short shallow bursts and his skin gleamed with sweat.

‘Well then,’ he panted. ‘I want you to do me a favour, young Rufus. I want you to go astern to the starboard locker.’

Rufus nodded, white-faced.

‘You remember when I showed you the locker where the flares are stowed? Good lad. The locker beside it is padlocked. Here’s the key...’ Leclare pushed a keyring across the table. ‘It’s the bright gold one. I want you to open it up and fetch me out a bottle of Jameson’s.

‘Skipper are you sure?’ said Ned. ‘If you’re not well...

‘I know what I need, so I do,’ said Leclare. ‘You stay with me, young Ned. Off you go, Rufus. Quick as you like.’

Rufus turned and clambered noisily up the ladder to the main deck.

‘What a lump,’ said Leclare. ‘He’ll never make a sailor, that one.’

Ned put a hand on his shoulder. ‘Paddy, please don’t be angry with me, but I really don’t think you should be drinking. Whatever it is that’s wrong with you, I’m sure it won’t be made any better by —‘

‘Calm down, Ned. There’s no whisky in that locker, and

I told him the wrong key too. It gives us a little time.

Laughter at the neatness of his strategy set Leclare off into a renewed fit of coughing that sprayed blood and spittle into Ned’s face.

‘Oh Jesus, Skipper. Look, I’m going to radio for a helicopter.’

‘Pass me that bag over there,’ said Leclare, as if he hadn’t heard.

‘This one?’

‘That’s the feller, hand it to me. Now Ned, look into my eyes.

Ned looked into eyes that he recalled as being merrily blue. They were bloodshot now and leaking tears from the effort of coughing.

‘I can trust you, can’t I, Ned?’

‘Of course, Skipper.’

‘Tell me the thing in your life that you hold most holy.’

'Skipper...'

‘For fuck’s sake will you answer me, boy!’ Leclare grabbed Ned’s wrist and squeezed it hard. ‘What is the thing that matters to you most in all the world? Are you thinking of it, is it in your head right now?’

Ned nodded as a vision of a laughing Portia arose before him.

‘Good. Now I want you to swear on that most holy thing that what I ask you to do you will do without telling a soul. Do you understand? Not a soul.’

Ned nodded once more.

‘Out loud! Swear it out loud.’

‘I swear it, Paddy, I swear it.’

‘Good ... good. I trust you. Now then...’ Leclare scrabbled inside his bag. ‘Take this envelope here. It is sealed. If I don’t make it back and healthy to land I want you to deliver it for me. Personally. It must go direct into the hands of...’ Leclare beckoned for Ned to come close and leaned up to whisper a name and address, his hot breath panting into Ned’s ear. ‘There! You’ve got that?’

‘Yes, I think so.’

‘Say it back to me. Whisper it to me now.’

Ned cupped his mouth round Leclare’s ear and breathed, ‘Philip R. Blackrow, 13 Heron Square, London SW1.’

‘You’ve got it. And you’ll not forget?’

‘No, never. I promise.

‘That’s that then. Tuck the envelope away, let no one see it and we’ll say not one word more about it. And don’t you forget that name and address. There. Not such a difficult or dreadful thing to ask, after all, was it now?’

Leclare let go of Ned’s wrist and leaned back, gasping for breath. Ned watched the little remaining colour drain from his face.

‘Can I radio for help now, Skipper?’

‘We’ll be ashore in five or six hours. Make no difference either way.’

‘But what is it? What’s wrong?’

‘It’s no more than a touch of illness,’ Leclare said quietly, smiling and closing his eyes. ‘A little kiss of cancer, so it is. No more than that.’

Rufus Cade arrived back in time to witness Ned, with great tenderness, laying a sleeping-bag over the dying man’s shoulders and gently stroking his head.

Ashley Barson-Garland had written seventy letters that morning. Seventy calm, placating and — though he said it himself — beautifully expressed letters. Letters to old ladies unable to understand the changes to the law on pensions, letters to unemployed layabouts who chose to blame the government for their lack of self-respect, letters from delirious fascists who thought Sir Charles Maddstone was Soft On Crime and letters from transcendently sad individuals who were determined to tell the MP about Christ.

So much noise from the populace. So much clamouring for attention. So much inadequacy and resentment. The life of a politician was indeed one of lying, lying and lying. Not the lying that people supposed, not the trail of broken promises and cynical denials complained about by newspaper and bar-stool sceptics, another kind of lying altogether. Allowing people to believe that their bitter and ignorant opinions were of use or importance, this to Ashley was the great lie. There seemed to be millions out there who could not understand that their problem was not this or that injustice or social ill, but the diminished sense of self that caused them to blame anything other than their own bitterness and rage: to bolster this delusion, that was the supreme dishonesty. There were people who believed that their opportunities to live a fulfilled life were hampered by the number of Asians in England, by the existence of a royal family, by the volume of traffic that passed by their house, by the malice of trade unions, by the power of callous employers, by the refusal of the health service to take their condition seriously, by communism, by capitalism, by atheism, by anything, in fact, but their own futile, weak-minded failure to get a fucking grip. Ashley understood Caligula’s disappointment that the people of Rome had between them more than one neck. If only the British, he thought, had one backside. What a kick he would love to give it.

To his right on the desk lay the letters, open flat in their envelopes awaiting signature. They were elegantly typed on parliamentary writing paper, the green House of Commons portcullis above Sir Charles’s name, each letter clean, unblemished and perfect. Ashley moved the four piles to the left of the blotter, a more convenient position for signing for when Sir Charles arrived. Ashley prided himself on these touches. He was the perfect servant, intelligent, thoughtful, thorough and discreet and for the moment, this contented him.

From the briefcase at his feet he pulled his diary. Only five and a half pages to fill before he would need a second volume. He wondered if he would be able to find the same book again. The shop in St Anne’s Square where he bought the first had closed two years ago. Another colour would be ideal, but it must be the same book. If he found a source he would buy at least ten, a lifetime’s supply. Would ten be enough, however? He made a rapid calculation. Twenty would be safer. ‘The Invicta’ it called itself grandly, the kind of Empire name that used to be bestowed upon everything from urinals to pocket-knives. He riffled through, observing with pleasure the growth in confidence and style of his handwriting. The last entry had been made five weeks ago. There was much to squeeze into the final pages. He should pick up from his last sentence: ‘For the moment I must put this obscene invasion out of my mind, for I have the School Address to concern myself with.’

July 30th

Can it really be only five weeks since the end of term? The Oration, of course, was a triumph of wit, knowledge, flair and — as you might say — address. As such, it was understood by no one in the hall, not even by those who could decipher the Latin. The assembled parents, staff and boys knew just enough to imagine that it was clever and treated me afterwards to the embarrassed, sympathetic and bravely smiling looks which the British habitually save up for those afflicted with terminal cancer or with brains, brains being by far the more unfortunate condition in their eyes. Most people, after all, can imagine having terminal cancer, they can’t begin to imagine having brains. Ned introduced me to his father who came as near to bowing as one can these days.

‘Your own parents not here today, Mr Barson-Garland?’

‘My mother teaches, sir,’ I said, liking the ‘sir’ and liking the fact that Sir Charles liked it. I liked too Ned’s discomfiture and watched him trying to think of something to say which wouldn’t draw attention to the idea of my mother or my family.

‘Ah well,’ his father said. ‘She must be very proud of you.’

Ned delivered a feeble matey punch to my arm as they passed on. He knew of course what kind of teaching it is my mother does. He probably even guessed that I had told her to stay away.

‘Very few parents come to Speech Day,’ I had written to her. ‘You’ll find it a bore.’

What I had meant was, ‘You dare turn up and disgrace me in a bright print dress, cheap scent and a loathsome hat and I shall disown you.

I dare say Mother read all that between the lines because mothers do and I dare say that I had meant her to because sons do.

Having endured the sickly congratulations and sherry of the headmaster, (‘Ah, here comes our pocket Demosthenes!’) I escaped after lunch to the cricket match, only to find myself forced to witness the spectacle of Ned Maddstone distinguishing himself with unquestionable style against the Old Boys. Every time someone talked to me, they kept half an eye on him at the wicket and I could smell their minds weighing his tallness, blondness and smiliness against my squat, dark seriousness. The stench of that drove me back to the house where I looked up Rufus Cade whom I found in his study weltering in his own mephitic fug — cannabis, vodka and resentment. Now here’s an interesting thing. Whether to please me or not he professed a severe dislike of Maddstone. No, it cannot have been to please me, I had already sensed the fact and asked him outright. It had been instinct. And I was right. He loathes Ned. He is ashamed of loathing Ned, which makes him loathe Ned all the more. A treadmill of disgust and resentment I am all too familiar with.

Who should then turn up, flushed and triumphant in scarlet and green stained flannels, hot from glory in the field, but Maddstone himself? He invited me to dine with his father at the George. The transparent guilt in his eyes was almost hilarious. ‘You may think of yourself as an outsider,’ his eyes said, ‘but I think of you as one of us.’

Balls. If he had thought of me as One Of Us he would have said, ‘Ashley, bloody bore, but how d’you fancy joining me and my father at the George?’ instead of which he got all flustered and asked Rufus to come too while managing to make it painfully obvious that he only asked out of politeness. Rufus declined on the grounds of intoxication, which I think embarrassed him into hating Ned all the more. I accepted with entirely sincere pleasure.

I wore my one suit.

‘Very good of you to join us, Mr Barson-Garland,’ said Sir Charles, shaking my hand in courtly style. ‘How absurd of me, I can’t keep calling you that. Ned hasn’t told me your Christian name.

‘Ashley, sir,’ I said, as Ned buried himself in confusion and the menu.

I talked a lot over dinner. Not so much or so greedily as to appear to monopolise the conversation or to boast, but enough to impress.

‘You seem to know a great deal about politics,’ said Sir Charles over the cheese.

I shrugged with open hands as if to suggest that, while I may have picked up the odd pebble of interest on the shore, like Newton I was all too aware of the great ocean of knowledge that lay undiscovered before me.

‘I don’t suppose this would interest you...

There and then he offered me a summer job as his political researcher.

‘A great deal of it is really not much more than a kind of secretarial work,’ he warned. ‘But it is, I think, an unrivalled opportunity to find out how the system operates. If it works out over the summer, I’ll be happy to keep the place open for when you leave here in late autumn. Ned tells me that you are sitting Oxford entrance next term too.’

‘Father, that’s a brilliant idea,’ Ned gasped admiringly (as if it hadn’t been his idea in the first place! How big a fool can he possibly take me for?). ‘I’m Pa’s biggest disappointment,’ he added, turning to me. ‘Never could summon up much interest in politics.’

‘Sir Charles,’ I said, ‘I don’t know how to begin to thank you...

‘Tshush, tshush,’ said Sir Charles, waving a hand. ‘If you’re as good at the job as I suspect you might be, then the thanks will be mine. Do I take it you accept?’

‘Well, sir. I live in Lancashire. I don’t have any...' Lancashire, indeed. I was used to saying that. Any ‘shire’ sounded better than Manchester.

‘I’m hoping you will consider staying in Catherine Street. It’s a small house, but has been a political one for over a hundred years. It has its own Division Bell, not that you will hear it ring much at first. The House doesn’t sit over the summer. If you’re still with us next year however, you’ll get so used to its ringing that you’ll want to sabotage the damned thing. Isn’t that right Ned?’ He waggled an eyebrow at his son in a way that suggested some private joke.

‘When I was a boy I used to get really hacked off by that bell,’ Ned explained in answer to my questioning look. ‘The House sits at the weirdest times and it was always waking me up at two or three in the morning. So one night I wedged a piece of cardboard between the bell and the clapper. Pa missed a vote and got into a bucket load of trouble.’

‘I passed a quarter hour in the Whips’ Office that I shall never forget,’ said Sir Charles.

Ned added to me in a pretend whisper, ‘He still says that nothing the Gestapo did to him in the war came close.’

‘It’s true I tell you, absolutely true.’

Ned was letting me into his life. A life in which casual mention of Division Bells and sticky moments with the Gestapo came as easily as references to buses and episodes of Dallas came to my family. Had I not seen that little four-leafed clover flutter from my diary, such generosity should have warmed and enchanted me. Since I knew exactly where it came from I was not fooled for a second.

They found me a flat in Kensington which I share with a researcher from Conservative Central Office. Flats in Kensington seem to be a staple currency of this world. There is a lazy sense of —

Between the two sounds of the front door opening and the front door closing Ashley had swiftly returned the diary to his briefcase, opened a copy of Hansard and begun copying one of Sir Charles’s speeches into a notebook.

He heard the sounds of people moving up the stairs and wondered if his not coming halfway to greet them would Look strange. Could he pretend not to have heard their arrival? He decided not.

‘Ned?’ he called over his shoulder from his desk. ‘Ned, is that you?’

‘Ash!’

Ashley was standing shyly at the desk with a look of pleased surprise on his face as Ned entered the room in the company of a girl and boy of about the same age, both darkly handsome and deeply tanned.

‘This is Portia. Actually you’ve met.’

‘How do you do?’ said Ashley, with becoming gravity. ‘We have indeed met. The Hard Rock Café, although you won’t remember me — your eyes I think were elsewhere.’

‘Of course I remember. Hi!’

Portia shook his hand. Ashley had not had time to wipe it against his trousers and he looked at her closely to see if she reacted to what he knew was the unusually moist clamminess of his palms.

‘And this is Gordon, Portia’s cousin.

‘How do you do?’ said Gordon. Ashley registered with amusement the fact that English Portia had made do with ‘Hi’ while American Gordon preferred a formal ‘How do you do?’ It always amused him when people presented themselves as the opposite of what they were.

‘Surprised?’ said Ned, biffing Ashley clumsily on the shoulder. He too was tanned, but in that lightly golden style of the fair-skinned, as if anything more would be foreign and in poor taste.

‘Well, your father did say that you wouldn’t be back until tomorrow.'

‘The trip, er, ended early in fact,’ Ned’s face looked troubled for a moment. ‘We all decided to take the night train from Glasgow.’

‘Really?’ said Ashley, who knew this perfectly well.

‘Anyway,’ said Ned brightening. ‘I was in London in time to meet the Fendemans off their plane at Heathrow. Not bad, eh?’

‘What a pleasant surprise for them,’ said Ashley.

Gordon was looking awkwardly around the room. Ashley had the feeling that he felt out of place. Indeed, the electrical sparks that crackled between Ned and Portia were little short of embarrassing even for Ashley.

‘The old man been keeping you busy?’ said Ned tearing himself away with an effort from Portia’s smile.

‘It’s been fascinating. Truly fascinating.’

‘You work for Ned’s dad, right?’ said Gordon.

‘That’s right. In fact I ought really ... well, actually, here’s an idea... I don’t suppose you’d like to come with me? I’ve got to go over to the House now. Maybe I could show you round?’

‘The House?’

‘Of Commons. Parliament. Of course, only if it would interest you...’

‘Sure. That sounds great.’

‘What a brilliant idea!’ Ned grinned with pleasure. ‘Ash, that’s completely decent of you. I bet Gordon would love to see where it all goes on. The cradle of democracy and all that.’

‘Very well then. I’ll just get my briefcase,’ said Ashley, prickling with annoyance at Ned’s fatuous remark. ‘Cradle of democracy’ indeed. Did he not know that Americans regard Washington as the cradle of democracy, just as the French did Paris and the Greeks Athens, and no doubt the Icelanders Reykjavik, each with as much reason? Such typically casual arrogance.

‘Er, we’ll stay here, if that’s okay,’ Ned was saying. ‘Portia has to be at a job interview at four. The Knightsbridge College. Thought I’d ... you know, take her there.’

‘Something good?

‘It sounds grand but it just means teaching foreigners how to say “This tomato is too expensive”,’ Portia said. ‘It does pay better than the Hard Rock Café, though.’

She and Ned were holding hands now. It was apparent that every second Out of each other’s arms was agony to them. Ashley supposed that much of the agony came from a traditional lovers’ quandary that they were too dull?-witted to interpret. They wanted to conceal their passion but they couldn’t understand why they also wanted desperately to show it off.

Ashley felt an intense desire to be violently sick.

‘Thought it best to leave them to it,’ he said, closing the front door and looking up at the top-floor window with what he trusted was a reasonable approximation of laddish worldliness. ‘They’ll be at it like knives before we’ve taken two steps.'

Gordon did not respond, but looked down at the ground with pursed lips. Ashley watched him curiously, was this American puritanism or something deeper?

Good God! The instant the possibility struck Ashley he knew it to be right. He could have laughed aloud at his perception. Cousin Gordon is in love with Portia, he told himself with absolute assurance.

The essential truth that people always failed to understand about intelligence, Ashley believed, was that it allowed its possessor deeper intuition and keener instincts than those granted to others. Stupid people liked to delude themselves that while they may not be clever, they were at least able to compensate with feelings and insights denied to the intellectual. Drivel, Ashley thought. It was precisely this kind of false belief that made stupid people so stupid. The truth was that clever people had infinitely more resources from which to make the leaps of connection that the world called intuition. What was ‘intelligence’ after all, but the ability to read into things? The Romans, as so often, knew better than the Britons.

They turned and walked along Catherine Street towards Westminster. Perhaps feeling that his silence was brutish, Gordon began to talk. He confided to Ashley that at the airport his aunt and uncle had more or less forced him onto Ned and Portia.

‘Why don’t you guys take the bus into town together?’ Hillary had said. ‘Have a bite to eat somewhere. Maybe take in a movie. We’ll take care of the luggage.’

Pete had slipped Gordon ten pounds and patted him on the shoulder while Portia bit her lip petulantly and Ned had done his best to look pleased.

‘Just as well we did the tactful thing, then,’ said Ashley. ‘You really don’t have to come to the House of Commons if you don’t feel like it, by the way. It’s most people’s idea of hell. I’d quite understand.’

‘Will they let an American in?’

‘I just have to wave this,’ said Ashley, flourishing his pass and trying not to look proud about it.

‘You gonna be a politician?’

‘Maybe. Maybe.’

‘Like Ned?’

‘I’m sorry?’

‘Ned’s gonna follow his father, right?’

‘I hardly think so,’ said Ashley, amused. An image came to him of Ned Maddstone in grass-stained cricket whites, flicking the golden flop out of his eyes and rising to speak from the government benches on the subject of currency fluctuations and interest rates. ‘Politics and Ned don’t quite go together.’

‘Really? Only that’s not what Portia said to me.’

‘What do you mean exactly?’

‘She said Ned had told her he was going to follow his father into Parliament one day.’

‘Well, maybe he will,’ Ashley said casually, while something inside him snapped with a familiar fury. Did Ned seriously imagine political seats could be passed on from father to son, like writing-desks and shooting-sticks?

Well, perhaps they could, he reflected bitterly; this is, after all, England. Meanwhile of course, Ned’s summer was too precious to him for it to be wasted on politics: too much fucking and cricket and fucking and sailing and fucking and fucking to be done, so why not let Ashley the Manchester carthorse do the secretarial work this year, eh, Pa old thing? Plenty of time for catching up after Oxford, don’t you think, Daddy darling? And one day, when I’m ‘ready to settle down’ I could send for good old Ashley and have him for a political assistant. Poor Ashley would be so grateful.., in fact, why not get him in training for it now? Give him a bit of experience? Just the thing! We’ll invite him along for dinner and put it to him, he’ll be so grateful. It’ll get that nasty business of reading his embarrassing diary off my conscience, too. We’ll give him the old oil and have him typing letters and licking envelopes before you can say Arrogant Cunting Upper Fucking Class Arseholes...

‘You all right?’

‘Mm? Yes, fine, fine ... miles away,’ Ashley smiled vaguely at Gordon as if emerging from a gently eccentric daydream. ‘So,’ he said brightly. ‘First time you’ve met the great Ned then?’

Gordon nodded cautiously. ‘The Great Ned?’

‘Forgive the promptings of a sarcastic heart,’ said Ashley. ‘He’s very popular of course. Very talented, but ... oh, you don’t want to listen to me. None of my business.’

‘Hey, if he’s dating my cousin, I want to know everything there is to know,’ said Gordon. ‘Portia thinks his shit don’t stink. But you’re in school with the guy. You’ve known him longer than she has.’

‘Well, let’s just say I wouldn’t like my cousin going out with him,’ said Ashley. ‘It’s hard to define. Most people think he’s charming and honest and everything that could ever be appealing in a man. Personally, I find him cold and arrogant and deceitful. Ah...’ Ashley looked up as Big Ben began to chime the half hour. ‘Twelve-thirty. If it’s all right with you, we might stop off at that pub round the corner. Said I would meet a friend there for lunch. If we feel like it we can go on to the House afterwards.’

‘Hey, look, if I’m in the way...’

‘Not at all. You’ll like Rufus. And he’ll like you. Well, he’ll like your ten pounds. You can buy a lot to drink with ten pounds.’

‘Oh well, if...’

‘I’m joking. He’s as rich as God. And I’m sure you’ll find that you have a great deal in common.

Ned lay in bed gazing up at the ceiling. With a fist clenched over her cheek, Portia slept tightly curled like a kitten beside him.

He hadn’t yet told her about the nightmare of watching Paddy Leclare dying on board the Orphana. On the bus from Heathrow they had talked almost like strangers, Ned concerned not to make Gordon feel left out and Portia strangely shy in her cousin’s presence too. He wasn’t going to worry her, but the experience had shaken him. He had never confronted death, responsibility and fear before and to meet them all in one go was unsettling.

Sailing back to Scotland with a dead man below had not been pleasant for him. Rufus Cade had behaved oddly too. It seemed natural that Ned should skipper the boat back to Oban and everyone but Cade agreed that it was right and sensible. Ned, without vanity he knew it to be true, was the best sailor amongst them, and surely Leclare’s last bestowal of trust in him proved his right to command? Not that he was able to repeat that secret to Cade or anyone else. For five hours, as dawn broke and they made their miserable way back to harbour, Cade had sullenly criticised all Ned’s decisions and gone out of his way to undermine his authority at every turn. This had never happened to Ned before and had left him feeling hurt and puzzled.

It was only as they were making their way through Oban harbour towards the quayside and the flashing blue lights of the ambulance and police-cars awaiting them that he had understood.

Cade had approached him shyly. ‘Look, I’m sorry, Maddstone,’ he said, staring down at the decking. ‘I suppose I was a bit upset by it all. Didn’t mean to criticise you. It’s right for you to be in charge.’

Ned had laid a hand on Cade’s arm. ‘Bloody hell, Rufus, don’t give it another thought. Under the circumstances you’ve been amazing.’

The rest of the day had passed in a confused dream of witness statements, telephone calls and interminable waiting before Ned had finally been allowed to lead the party off to Glasgow to catch the night train to Euston. Leadership was exhausting.

Portia’s head stirred on his chest and he found himself looking into her eyes.

‘Hello,’ he said.

‘Hello.’

And they laughed.

Ashley watched as Gordon drained his second Guinness.

‘You seen her, Ashley,’ he said, belching as he wiped the froth from his mouth. ‘She’s beautiful. Wouldn’t you say she’s beautiful?’

‘Very beautiful indeed, Gordon,’ said Ashley who possessed several very old Greek textbooks that he considered infinitely more exciting.

‘Sides,’ Gordon continued. ‘Where I come from you don’t marry out. You just don’t do that. It’s wrong.

Rufus was glowering into a pint of Director’s that he had already chased with three triple whiskies. ‘Marry out? What’s that mean when it’s at home?’

‘Gordon and Portia are Jewish,’ Ashley explained. ‘It isn’t done to marry outside the faith.’

‘I’m a catholic,’ said Rufus. ‘It’s the same with us.’

‘And she won’t look at me,’ said Gordon. ‘She won’t fucking look at me. You know what I’m saying?’

‘You’re saying she won’t look at you?’ said Rufus.

‘Right. You got it. Won’t look at me.

‘I see. That must piss you right off.’

‘Piss me off is right.’

‘It would piss me off too, I can tell you.’

Ashley was pleased to see Gordon and Rufus relaxed with each other, but he dreaded having to cope with two drunks. Although he was in the process of teaching himself everything there was to be known about wine, Ashley took little pleasure in alcohol, and none at all in drunkenness in himself or others. He knew enough not to show it, however and could nurse a drink through several rounds without looking like a prude.

‘So what exactly happened, Rufus? You say Leclare was dead when you returned?’

‘Jesus, Ash, I told you. He sent me off looking for a bottle of fucking Jameson’s that wasn’t there and by the time I got back, there was Saint Ned cradling him in his arms, cooing like a fucking pigeon. Next thing you know he’d helped himself to the command. Treated me like dirt too. Then had the fucking nerve to tell me that “under the circumstances I’d been brilliant. Meaning of course, that under the circumstances he had been brilliant. Tosser. Still, he was the one who had to deal with the police and the ambulance and all the paperwork. Ha! Bet that hadn’t occurred to him.’ Rufus struggled to his feet. ‘Anyway. Fuck him. Who wants another drink?’

‘Why not?’ said Ashley. ‘Same again please. Gin and tonic, ice but no lemon.’

‘This stuff really gets to your gut,’ said Gordon handing his empty glass to Rufus. ‘Maybe just a half pint this time.’

‘A half of gin and a pint of Guinness and lemon. No ice, but tonic. I’ve got you.’ Rufus began weaving his way to the bar.

‘He’s not half as drunk as he appears,’ said Ashley. ‘His father’s an alcoholic and he’s trying it on for size.

Gordon watched Rufus’s retreating form and then turned to Ashley. ‘You like to see through people, don’t you?’

‘Well,’ said Ashley, in some surprise. ‘Judging from that remark, so do you.

‘Right. Touché. So tell me, who was this guy, anyway?’

‘The school used him as some sort of sailing—instructor,' Ashley said with a dismissive wave, as if describing the local cesspit operative. ‘Those who sailed were very fond of him in that insufferably matey way that the yachting fraternity adopts. He was endlessly organising trips in the holidays for boys who could afford it — or cared to busy themselves with an occupation so imponderably tedious,’ Ashley added quickly.

‘I heard of cases in the States where these guys are perverts,’ said Gordon. ‘You know, sailing round the Caribbean with school kids. Kind of weird thing to do.’

‘Yes, but I hardly think so in this case. Whatever you may have read about English public schools that kind of thing is pretty rare.

‘Where’d they go?’

‘From the west of Scotland round to the Giant’s Causeway apparently and then back again. The year before that it was ... where did you go last year, Rufus?’ Rufus had returned, and was setting drinks on the table, a bag of peanuts between his teeth.

‘Hng?’

‘Last year. Where did the Sailing Club go?’

‘Hooker Horror.’

‘Excuse me?’

‘The Hook of Holland,’ said Rufus, tearing open the packet with his teeth and pushing it towards Gordon. ‘From Southwold across the North Sea to Flushing. Then up the inland waterways to Amsterdam and all the way back.’

‘And I take it Leclare never molested you in any way? Never threatened the delicate flower of your virginity?’

‘Fuck off!’

‘Just a thought we had.’

‘As a matter of fact, I’ve been thinking of going back,’ said Rufus. ‘Amsterdam that is. They have naked girls in the windows and more dope than you’ve ever seen in your life.’

‘You smoke?’ Gordon asked Rufus.

‘Does the Pope shit in the woods?’ Ashley murmured, helping himself to a single peanut.

Gordon lowered his voice excitedly. ‘You couldn’t put me on to someone, could you?’ he asked. ‘I haven’t had a smoke since I got here. I mentioned it to Portia one time and she looked at me like I was shit.’

‘Be a pleasure,’ said Rufus genially waving a hand. ‘You a grass man or a hash man?’

‘Grass,’ said Gordon.

‘No problem. As a matter of fact, I just happen to have on me the most seriously...

Ashley’s heart sank at the prospect of the conversation descending into drug talk. It was so much more amusing to hear Rufus and Gordon swapping complaints about Ned. Ned and drugs, unfortunately, did not mix in conversation. Mind you, of course ...

‘Wouldn’t it be fun,’ said Ashley, sipping his gin and tonic primly, ‘to watch Maddstone being busted by the Drug Squad? Bit of a scandal, bit of a disgrace, bit of a come down for the holy one and his father, don’t you think? And just imagine how shocked dear Portia would be.’

Rufus giggled and Gordon’s mouth fell open.

‘He’s going to be taking her to — what was it called? Something absurdly pretentious — the Knightsbridge College, that was it,’ Ashley continued dreamily. ‘Suppose the police were told that a wicked drug dealer had been seen hanging around outside the college most afternoons, distributing illegal substances to the students. Imagine witnessing the golden boy being led away in handcuffs.’

‘Yeah, but how...

‘His jacket’s at the bottom of the stairs. All we have to do, surely, is use a little intelligence.’

Ned stood naked at the window of his bedroom looking out over London. In an hour or so he might go down and scramble some eggs. Otherwise why would he ever want to leave this room for the rest of his life? They could stay here for ever. Only Portia had to be ready for her job interview. But they’d come back from that and run straight back up here again. Of course tomorrow morning his father was coming down from the country and they must be presentable then, but tomorrow was a world away. He couldn’t wait for Portia to meet his father, he felt they would become instant friends. A vista of their future years together appeared before him. Portia and Pa at Christmas, in the maternity ward, on holiday together. The smiling, the laughing, the affection, the love ... he wanted to weep with ecstasy.

A movement in the street below caught his eye. Ashley and Gordon were returning to the house, a third person between them. Ned smiled when he recognised the lumbering gait of Rufus Cade. How on earth had they bumped into him? Any other time it would be fun to welcome them in, but...

Never usually unsociable or selfish, Ned crept to the door and gently turned the key in the lock. The very delicacy of the sound woke Portia.

‘Did you just lock the door?’

“Fraid so,’ whispered Ned. ‘The others are coming back. Thought we might pretend to have gone out.’

Portia watched Ned crossing the room towards her and an intense happiness rushed through her like wind through grasses and she shivered and rippled with so much pleasure that she almost believed it was pain.

‘Don’t ever leave me.

‘No fear,’ Ned whispered, climbing back into bed.

They heard Ashley’s voice calling up the stairs.

‘We won’t disturb you both. Something I had to fetch. You young people enjoy yourselves!’

The smothered laughter of Gordon and Rufus delighted them. How wonderful it was to be giggled about.

Ned sighed with the completest fulfilment and joy. Where in all the universe was anyone so unfathomably lucky? He was young, healthy and happy and without a care or an enemy in the world.

Arrest

II

Ned shivered and pulled the blanket closer around his shoulders.

‘Excuse me,’ he said. ‘Do you think it would be possible for someone to bring me my clothes?’

The policeman at the door shifted his eyes from the ceiling to Ned.

‘Not cold is it?’

‘No, but you see I’m only wearing...’

‘Middle of summer, isn’t it?’

‘Yes, yes it is, but . ‘Well then.’

Ned stared at the foil ashtray in front of him on the table and tried to force his mind to concentrate on what had happened.

At four o’clock he had seen Portia into the College, which is to say they had rung the bell for the fifth floor of a disappointingly ordinary doorway in a narrow street behind the Scotch House.





THE STARS’




‘I’ll be outside,’ he promised, kissing her goodbye as if for the longest parting. ‘And when you come out we’ll go into Harrods for an ice-cream soda to celebrate.’

He had been waiting there on the pavement for nearly half an hour, trying to work out, in a cheerful sort of way, whether or not Portia taking such a time up there was a good sign. Being an optimist, he had naturally decided that it was.

A group of young Spaniards or Italians (he couldn’t really tell which) had come up to the door. They had been in the act of producing a key when Ned had decided, on an impulse, to be let in with them. The sight of a respectably dressed boyfriend might just tip the balance in Portia s favour.

‘Excuse me,’ he had said. ‘Would it be all right if I came in with you?’

They had looked at him in bewilderment. If this was the average standard of English here, then Portia was going to have a lot to do.

‘I... JUST... WONDER... IF...YOU...‘he had started to say, but before the words were out of his mouth it had all happened. Appearing it seemed from nowhere, two men had each seized an arm and bundled Ned towards a car. Too surprised to speak, the last thing he heard before a hand pushed him down into the back seat was the raucous laughter of a small group of people standing in the dimly lit doorway of the nearby pub.

‘W-what’s going on?’ he had asked. ‘What are you doing?’

‘You’d better ask yourself what you’ve been doing,’ one of the men had said drawing a foil package from Ned’s jacket pocket, as the car accelerated away with a squeal of tyres.

At the police station he had been more thoroughly searched. They had taken away for examination every?thing but his underpants and he had been sitting in this room now for over half an hour, wondering what could possibly be going on. The next time the door opened and someone came in, he decided, he would insist on being allowed to telephone his father. The police had no idea they were dealing with a cabinet minister’s son. Sir Charles was a gentle and scrupulously polite man, but he had commanded a brigade in the war and run a small pocket of Empire for six years. In the Sudan he had pronounced sentences of death and seen them carried out. As Secretary of State for Northern Ireland he had extended the limits of internment without trial and authorised all kinds of extreme measures — ‘strong medicine for a strong infection’ he had said to Ned once, without revealing details. This was not a man to be messed with. Ned almost felt sorry for the police. He would assure his father that he had been kindly treated and that he held no grudge.

At last, the door to the interview room opened.

‘Right then, son.’

‘Hello, sir.

‘My name is Detective Sergeant Floyd.’

‘If it’s all right, I’d like to ring ...

‘Cigarette?’

Floyd dropped a packet of Benson and Hedges and a lighter onto the table as he drew up a chair opposite Ned and sat down.

‘No thanks. I don’t smoke.’

‘You don’t smoke?’

‘No.’

‘Half an ounce of hash and you don’t smoke?’

‘I’m sorry?’

‘Bit late for “sorry” isn’t it? One thing to have it for your own use. But selling to foreign students. Magistrates don’t like that.’

‘I don’t understand.’

‘Of course you don’t. How old are you?’

‘Seventeen and a half.’

‘Seventeen and a half? And a half’

The policeman at the door joined in the laughter. ‘Well, I am,’ said Ned, tears beginning to form in his eyes. What was wrong with saying that, when it was true?

Floyd frowned and bit his lip. ‘Let’s forget about the drugs, shall we? Tell me what “Interior, interior, interior” means to you.

Ned looked at him helplessly. ‘I’m sorry?’

‘Not a difficult question is it? Interior, interior, interior. Tell me about it.’

‘I don’t know what you mean.’ Ned felt as though he was drowning. ‘Please, I want to ring my father.’

‘Let’s start at the beginning, shall we? Name?’

‘Do be quiet, there’s a good fellow.’

Ned and the Detective Sergeant turned together. A neatly dressed man in his mid-twenties was standing in the doorway, a gentle smile on his face.

‘And just who the hell might you be?’ said Floyd, outraged.

‘A word, Sergeant,’ said the young man, beckoning with his finger.

Floyd opened his mouth to speak, but something in the young man s bland expression made him change his mind.

The door closed on Ned once more. He could hear Detective Sergeant Floyd’s voice raised in barely controlled anger in the corridor outside. ‘With respect, sir, I do not see the need ...

‘With respect, that’s the ticket, Floyd. Respect. Just

what’s needed. Now I’ll take those if you please. Thank you... paperwork will follow.’

The door opened again and the young man popped his head in, smiling. ‘Would you like to come with me, old chap?’

Ned jumped to his feet and followed the young man along a passageway, past an angry Detective Sergeant Floyd.

‘Can I use the telephone?’ Ned asked.

‘Ridiculous of them,’ said the young man, as if he hadn’t heard, ‘to strip you like that. Ah, here’s Mr Gaine!’ He indicated a broad-shouldered man in a denim jacket who was leaning against a fire door at the end of the passage bearing in his arms a pile of clothes, neatly folded with the shoes lying upside-down on top.

‘Those are mine!’ said Ned.

‘That’s right. We shan’t have time to put them on just now, I’m afraid, we must be off. All set, Mr Gaine?’

The broad-shouldered man nodded and pushed against the bars of the door. The young man escorted Ned down some steps into a courtyard and towards a green Rover parked in the corner, where the sunlight beat down on its roof.

‘You just hop in the back with me. We’ll let Mr Gaine drive shall we?’

Ned winced when his bare thighs touched the upholstery.

‘Scorched you a bit? Sorry about that,’ said the young man cheerfully. ‘Should’ve thought to park in the shade, shouldn’t we, Mr Gaine? All righty, then, cabin doors to automatic. Let’s not hang about.’

‘Where are we going?’ Ned asked, adjusting the blanket around himself to protect his legs and his modesty.

‘My name’s Delft,’ was the reply. ‘Like those ghastly blue and white tiles. Oliver Delft.’ He put out a hand for Ned to shake. ‘And you are...?’

‘Edward Maddstone.’

‘Edward? They do call you Edward, do they? Or are you an Ed, Eddie, Ted or Teddy?’

‘Ned, usually.’

‘Ned. Fair enough. I’ll call you Ned then, and you can call me Oliver.’

‘Where are we going?’

‘Well, there’s lots to talk about, isn't there? I thought perhaps we might go somewhere nice and quiet.’

‘Only, my girlfriend, you see ... she doesn’t know where I am. And my father...’

‘We’ve a fair drive ahead of us, I’m afraid. I’d try and get a bit of shut-eye if I were you. I know I shall.’ Delft settled against the headrest.

‘She’ll be worried...’

But Delft, apparently asleep in an instant, said nothing. Since the sleepless night of his watch on the Orphana and the anxious day that followed it, Ned had lain awake on a bumpy train from Glasgow to London. The next day, today — could that really be today? — he had travelled out to the airport and then back again to Catherine Street. There he did, it was true, spend time in bed, but he had not slept. Portia had dozed a little, but Ned had been too happy to think of sleep.

But now, in spite of the strangeness of his circum?stances, he found himself starting to yawn. The last thing he saw before he fell asleep was the rear-view mirror and Mr Gaine’ s cold eyes watching him.

‘You’ll have to forgive my brutal way with an egg,’ said Oliver Delft. ‘It started life as an omelette aux fines herbes but now I’m afraid it’s just scrambled eggs speckled with green. Non-stick! It’s just a phrase if you ask me.’ He pushed a plate towards Ned and smiled.

‘Thanks.’ Ned began to shovel the eggs into his mouth, amazed at how hungry he was. ‘Very good.’

‘You honour me. While you eat, we can talk.’

‘Is this your house?’

‘It’s a place I come to sometimes,’ said Delft. He was leaning against the Aga rail, a glass of wine in his hand.

‘Are you a policeman?’

‘A policeman? No, no. Nothing as thrilling as that, I’m afraid. Just a humble toiler in the lower realms of government. All very dull. Here to get to the bottom of one or two things.’

‘If it’s about the drugs the police found, I swear to you I don’t know anything about them.’

Delft smiled again. The smile was an effort. Inside, he was very bored and extremely annoyed to be there. The pleasurable long weekend he had been looking forward to for ages had already been ruined.

Five minutes ... five blasted minutes were all that had come between Oliver and freedom. He had already locked his desk and had been in the very act of signing the duty log when Maureen had bustled in, twittering about a flash from West End Central.

‘Isn’t Stapleton here yet? I’m about to go off watch.’

‘No, Mr Delft. Captain Stapleton hasn’t signed in. There’s no one else.’

‘Bugger,’ Oliver had said, meaning it. ‘All right then, let’s have a look.’

He had taken Maureen’s typed slip and read it through carefully. ‘Hum. Who’s in the Heavy Pool?’

‘Mr Gaine, sir.’

‘Get him to warm the car up. I’ll be out in three.’

That had been something at least. Mr Gaine was Oliver’s man and could be trusted not to make life more difficult by ruffling feathers and stamping on sensibilities.

Whatever Oliver had expected when he arrived at Savile Row police station, it certainly hadn’t been a worried schoolboy. The whole thing seemed ripely absurd. Undoubtedly a mistake, he had said to himself the moment he laid eyes on the floppy haired teenager jiggling his knee up and down under the interview-room table, a forlorn and bewildered look on his face. Delft may have been only twenty-six himself, but he had seen enough to be sure that Ned Maddstone was as innocent as a day-old chick. A day old carrier pigeon chick, he thought to himself. He was pleased with the image and made a note to include it in his report. His masters were old-fashioned enough to enjoy a pert turn of phrase.

He looked across at the child now.

Ned was sitting at the kitchen table, still jogging his leg on the ball of his foot, with an earnest pleading look on his innocent face.

‘Honestly,’ he was saying. ‘I absolutely swear. On the Holy Bible!’

‘Calm down,’ said Oliver. ‘I really don’t think a Bible will be necessary. Not that we’d be able to find one in a place of sin like this,’ he added, looking round the room as if it were less a country kitchen and more a Louisiana brothel. ‘You can swear on Marguerite Patten’s Cookery in Colour if it gives you pleasure, but there’s no need.’

‘You do believe me then?’

‘Well, of course I believe you, you daft young onion. All some silly mistake. Still, as we’re here, you might as well tell me what the words “Interior, interior, interior” mean.’

‘I don’t know!’ said Ned. ‘The policeman asked me the same thing, but I’ve never heard them. I mean, I’ve heard the word “interior” before, obviously, but...’

‘You see, this is what we have to try and understand,’ said Oliver. ‘And when we’ve got to the bottom of it we can let you go and you can get on with your life and I can get on with mine, which I’m sure we’d both like.’

Ned nodded vigorously. ‘Absolutely! But...’

‘All right then. Now let’s have a look at this shall we?’

Oliver came forward and laid on the table a single sheet of paper.

Ned stared at it mystified. It was a typed list of names and addresses. He recognised at once the names of the Home Secretary, the Lord Chancellor, the Secretary of State for Defence followed by others, vaguely familiar to Ned. Last of all came his father’s name, Sir Charles Maddstone. At the bottom, in handwritten large black block capitals were the words —INTERIOR INTERIOR INTERIOR

‘What does it mean?’ he asked.

‘It belongs to you,’ said Oliver. ‘You tell me.’

‘My piece of paper? But I’ve never seen it before.’

‘Then what was it doing in the inside pocket of your jacket?’

‘In the... oh!’ The truth began to dawn. ‘Was it... was it originally in an envelope?’

‘It was in an envelope!’ said Oliver. ‘You’re absolutely right! It was in this envelope!’ He held up a white envelope, an envelope that to his annoyance the police had torn open without a single thought. Oliver had immediately spotted a tiny hair behind the flap, a little security measure sealed there to warn the recipient of any tampering. It might be possible to find a duplicate envelope and put the letter back in play, but one never knew what other safeguards the police might have blundered through. Not really their fault of course, he conceded. The search had been routine. They had imagined they were dealing with nothing more than a spoilt kid’s drug stash.

‘But why is it important?’ Ned asked. ‘What does it mean?’

‘Well now, you’ve just admitted that it’s yours, so I should’ve thought you’d be the one to tell me.

Ned shifted uncomfortably. ‘But you see I was... I was given it.’

‘Yes, I’m afraid I’m going to need a bit more than that.’

‘By a man.

‘Well that eliminates two billion or so, but it’s still not quite enough, is it? We’re going to have to narrow it down a little more than that.’

‘He’s dead.’

‘A dead man gave it to you.

‘He only died yesterday.’

‘Don’t arse around with me, Ned, there’s a good fellow. Who was he and how did he come to give it to you?’

Tell me the thing in your life that you hold most holy.

Ned could have wept with frustration. He was desperate to do the right thing. He wanted to please this nice man, but he wanted to keep his word too. Would it bring him the most terrible luck to break so mighty an oath?

What is the thing that matters to you most in all the world?

What would Portia want him to do?

‘Is it very important that I tell you? Important enough to make me break a solemn oath?’

‘Well now, young scout,’ said Oliver. ‘I’ll tell you a thing. A thing you shouldn’t know, but that I trust you to keep to yourself. Glass of wine?’

‘Do you have any milk?’

.‘Milk? Let me see.’ Oliver went over to the fridge and peered suspiciously inside as if it were the first fridge he had ever inspected. ‘Milk, milk, milk... ah yes. Now my job, Ned, such as it is,’ he went on, ‘involves, amongst other things, doing my best to stop people letting off bombs in this country. Only UHT I’m afraid — semi?-skimmed. Do you mind?’

‘That’s perfect, thank you.’

‘Can’t bear the stuff myself. Makes me snotty. Letting off bombs, Ned, is a thing some scallywags do, as you must have read in the papers. They’ll do it in pubs, clubs, offices, railway stations and shops, killing and crippling ordinary people who have no quarrel with anyone but their bank managers, bosses and spouses. Drink it from the carton, there’s a lamb. Now, some of these bombers, they like to call up a police station or a newspaper office to claim the credit, if credit is the right word, or — if they’ve a spark of humanity and it’s only property they want to destroy — to warn the police to evacuate the area. Making sense so far?’

Ned nodded, wiping a white moustache from his lips with the back of his hand.

‘Well then. To prevent any old deranged freak from calling up and leaving hoax warnings or taking credit just for fun, a more or less workable arrangement has been arrived at between us — the government, and them — the bona fide terrorists. When a bomber calls up a newspaper or a police station he gives a code word, to show that he is the real thing. Not going too fast for you?’

‘No.’

‘Good. Well now, it so happens that the Provisional IRA’s latest coded warning for a bomb, just a few days old, is the word “Interior” repeated three times.’

‘But...’

‘So perhaps now you can see why Detective Sergeant Floyd, whom God preserve, got a little excited when he found this piece of paper in your jacket. And perhaps now you can see why he gave my department a call and why I am asking you now to tell me how you got hold of it. The man who gave you that envelope was an IRA terrorist, Ned. The worst and darkest kind of man. The kind of man whose idea of political protest is to blow the arms and legs off young children. Whatever oath of secrecy he may have sworn you to is meaningless. So let’s have his name.’

‘Paddy Leclare,’ said Ned. ‘His name was Paddy Leclare. He was a sailing instructor. We were at sea and he suddenly became terribly ill. He gave it to me just before he died.’

‘Well now you see. There we have it,’ Oliver said, patting Ned on the back. ‘That wasn’t so difficult, was it?’

‘I had ... I had absolutely no idea. I mean he was employed by the school and everything. If I’d thought for a minute...'

‘Of course not, you daft young kipper.’

‘Do you think it was because of my father?’

‘Your father? Why should.., oh, you’re that kind of a Maddstone, are you? As in Sir Charles? What, he’s your granddad is he?’

‘He’s my father,’ said Ned defensively. ‘I was a...a late arrival.’

‘I had rooms in Maddstone Quad during my second year at St Mark’s,’ said Oliver. ‘I had a perfect view from my window of a great big stone statue of John Maddstone, the founder of the college. You don’t look a bit like him. We used to paint it dark blue during Eights Week, you know. Well, well. I expect it gave your friend Paddy Leclare quite a kick entrusting his letter to you. Sort of thing that appeals to his kind.’

‘He wasn’t my friend!’ said Ned indignantly. ‘He was just the school’s sailing instructor.’

‘Forgive me.

Ned looked down at the piece of paper. ‘So these are all people that the IRA wants to kill?’

‘That’s how things look on the face of it, certainly,’ Oliver conceded. ‘But how things are and how things look aren’t always the same.

Ned examined the list of names. ‘I don’t see what else it could mean,’ he said. ‘These are all politicians and generals and things, aren’t they?’

‘Well, maybe we are supposed to think that they’re targets. Maybe your friend Leclare believed that you would open the letter out of curiosity, get suspicious and show it to your father. Maybe the whole idea is to make us run around wasting a lot of time, effort and manpower laying on extra protection while their real targets lie elsewhere. Or maybe the envelope has been impregnated with some deadly bug and the plan was for you to pass the infection on to your father who in turn would pass it on to the entire cabinet. Maybe that’s why Leclare fell ill and died — maybe he’d been a bit careless with the old microbes.’

‘Oh my God! But...’

‘Or there’s another maybe. Maybe they planted that cannabis on you and then tipped off the police just in order to winkle me out and follow us here. Maybe they’re in a van outside now with a mortar trained on this very room. Maybe a thousand things. We don’t know. There are as many maybes as there are seconds in a century. But this one thing I can tell you for certain,’ Oliver said, drawing up a chair opposite Ned. ‘We won’t know anything until you’ve told me the whole story from start to finish. I hope you can agree with that?’

‘Of course. Absolutely.’

‘Good. I have been very frank with you and now you can repay the compliment. You give me everything you’ve got, and before you know it, Mr Gaine will be driving us back to London. You’ll be home and in the bosom of your family before the News at Ten, that’s a promise. You don’t mind a tape-recorder, I suppose?’

‘No,’ said Ned. ‘Not at all.’

‘Excellent. Sit you there and drink your milk. Be back in a tick.’

Hoo-bloody-rah. Oliver’s mind raced ahead as he went through into the sitting room. If he got back to town, sketched out a preliminary report and left Stapleton to make the security calls, he could be heading out to the country by midnight. Maybe his weekend could be salvaged after all.

‘As you were, Gaine. Where’s the Revox?’

‘Cupboard under the bookshelf, sir. I’ll fetch it.’

Oliver picked up the Evening Standard Quick Crossword against which Mr Gaine had been pitting his mighty wits.

‘There’s your problem. Eft.’

‘Sir?’

‘Four across, “Newt”. You’ve put Rat, should be Eft.’

‘Why Rat, incidentally?’

‘Well, Mr Delft, sir,’ said Mr Gaine, handing Oliver the tape-recorder. ‘Pissed as a rat, pissed as a newt.’

‘How silly of me,’ said Oliver, marvelling once more at Gaine’ s unusual thought processes. ‘Well, we shouldn’t be much more than an hour. Oh, be a hero and fill the Rover up with petrol, will you? There should be some jerrycans in the garage.

‘Have done, sir.’

‘Good man. Oh and Gaine?’

‘Sir?’

‘You’re sure we weren’t tailed on the way up?’

‘Sir!’ Mr Gaine was deeply reproachful. ‘Thought not. Just checking.’

‘So. To begin at the beginning. When did you first meet this Paddy Leclare?’

On and on came the questions, one after another. Ned had been talking for over an hour now, and still they hadn’t come to the last night on board the Orphana. Oliver had wanted to know not just every detail of every previous trip abroad, but of every term-time meeting of the Sailing Club too.

‘You’re doing well, Ned, very well. Not too far to go now. Where were we? Ah, yes. Ireland. The Giant’s Causeway. Two hours he was away while you boys played on the beach and gasped with pleasure at the rock formations. Two hours exactly?’

‘One and half hours perhaps, two at the most.’

‘And when he came back, he was on his own?’

‘I definitely didn’t see anyone with him.’

‘And then you set off for Oban again, sailing through the night? What time was that?’

‘Eight thirty-five. I helped with the log. I told you.’

‘Just making sure, just making sure. Now, describe the conditions to me. There’s a new moon rising just now isn’t there? You can see it through the window. So two nights ago it must have been pretty dark. There you were, out to sea, hugging a barren coast. Pitch black, I should think, but only for an hour or so at the most, this time of year. Am I right?’

And on and on came the questions. Oliver was naturally thorough because he was trained to be, but he was covering the ground with especial care now because he had no wish to have to haul Ned back at some later date to go over any questions that he might have missed. There would be enough work in the coming weeks, interviewing the boy’s headmaster, other members of the school bloody sailing club as well as witnesses in Oban and Tobermorey and Holland and a dozen other places besides.

'... I could tell at once he was very seriously ill.., sent Cade off to find a bottle of whisky ... no, Jameson’s ... seemed to find it funny ‘... made me swear ... whatever was most holy to me...

Oliver drained his wine glass.

‘Excellent, excellent. And the envelope came from where?’

‘Well, a shop I suppose. A stationer’s. He never said.’

‘No, no. He produced it from where? His pocket? A safe? What?’

‘Oh I see. From a small bag. It was on the chart table.’

‘Colour?’

‘Red. It was red nylon.’

‘Any maker’s name? Adidas, Fila, that sort of thing?’

‘N-no... pretty sure not.’

‘Good, good. Your chum Rufus Cade still out of earshot, was he?’

‘Oh yes, definitely.’

‘You’re sure of that? You could see the hatchway from where you were?’

‘No, but Paddy could and he would have seen if Rufus had come back.’

‘Fair point. On we go.

‘Well, that’s when he told me to deliver the letter.’

‘There’s nothing on the envelope. Not written in invisible ink is it?’

‘No.’ Ned grinned at the idea. ‘He made me memorise the name and address.’

‘Which were ...

‘I was to deliver it to Philip R. Blackrow, 13 Heron Square, London SW1.’

It was as if a bolt of electricity had shot through Oliver Delft’s body. Every nerve end tingled, his heart gave a great leap and for a second blackness crowded in on his vision.

Ned looked at him with concern. ‘Are you all right?’

‘It’s cramp. Cramp that’s all. Nothing to worry about.’

Oliver stood up, turned off the tape-recorder and walked away from the table, pushing hard down on the toes of his right foot, as if trying to stretch out a muscle spasm. It was absolutely essential that he remain calm now, completely calm and completely in control.

‘Um listen,’ he said. ‘I won’t be a moment. Wait here, would you? Make some toast or something. There’s more of that milk in the fridge. I need to do a few things. Put in a call. Find you some clothes, that kind of thing. You’ll be all right?’

Ned nodded happily.

Mr Gaine was still wrestling with the crossword.

‘Everything all right, Mr Delft, sir?’

‘He’s a plausible little bastard,’ Oliver said. ‘We’re going to need to do a D16 on him. I’ll go up and clear it. Thank Christ we’re only half an hour away.

Mr Gaine’s eyebrows shot up. ‘A D16? Are you sure, sir?’

‘Of course I’m bloody sure. This is ultra, Gaine. Absolutely ultra. Whistle up a couple of your own, the tougher and dumber the better. You can use their car when they get here. I’ll be needing yours straight away. I’ll meet you at D16 tomorrow morning with the paperwork. Go on, go and call them up. Use the clean phone. Go now, now! What the fuck are you waiting for?’

Gaine headed for the door, alarmed at his first sight in four years of his master looking anything less than in total control.

Oliver stood in the middle of the room thinking furiously.

It was unbelievable, unbelievable! The name and address, spoken clearly out loud into a live microphone —well, that tape was going to have to be wiped, for a start. No, not wiped. London would need something. The flash from West End Central had been logged, there was Maureen, there was that Detective Sergeant.

Christ, the boy was a cabinet minister’s son. There’d be hell to pay if he played this wrong.

Oliver forced himself to take a mental step back and focus his thoughts. The Detective Sergeant and the arresting officers could be dealt with easily. They’d be signing the Official Secrets Act and swearing eternal silence by midnight, he would see to that personally. Besides, they didn’t even know Ned Maddstone’s name. Oliver had come into the interview room just as Floyd was asking Ned to reveal it.

The long weekend was shot to pieces now, no doubt about it. Oliver wasn’t even going to have a short one. And there was the problem of the tape. He needed a tape with a name and address spoken on it, that was certain, but not the name of Philip R. Blackrow and not that address.

It had been a horrible shock to hear that name, but when you came down to it, thought Oliver, it could be looked upon as a kind of gift from God. If the flash had come through just five minutes later, it would have been Stapleton here now, not Oliver. And if Stapleton had been given the name Blackrow...

No — all in all, God had been abundantly good. The boy had been picked up on the street. No one knew. No one knew. That simple fact gave him almost limitless power over the matter. From now on it was merely a question of finesse.

Oliver’s first instinct, almost before the name and address were out of Ned’s mouth, had been to undertake immediate terminal action, but he discarded any such thoughts now. In his world, whatever the contrary assumptions of newspapers and writers of fiction, death was always a very final resort — so final indeed, as to be almost beyond consideration. This was less a question of scruples than of options. An enemy might one day be turned into a friend and a friend into an enemy, a lie might be made true and a truth rendered false, but the dead could never, not ever, be transformed into the living. Flexibility was everything.

Besides, death had a way of loosening tongues. Dead men may not talk, but living men do and Oliver had great need of living men if he was to survive this crisis. He was confident, of course, that Gaine was as trustworthy as they made them, but the long view had to be taken. There were many bleak scenarios that Oliver could project, and many more, he knew, that he could never even guess at, life being life. There was always the threat of the development of a conscience in Gaine, or of a sudden religious conversion that might bring with it a flood of remorse and confession. Old-fashioned guilt-sodden liberalism was a dangerous prospect too, come to that. There was a descent into the bottle to consider, bringing with it threats of indiscretion or blackmail. Oliver had seen Gaine drunk — pissed as an eft, as it were — and while he knew that the man’s head was as strong as the rest of him, he could not possibly be sure how he would be in ten, twenty, thirty years’ time. Given the impermanence and uncertainty of everything, the permanence and certainty of death could prove the most disastrous choice of all. It was paradoxical but true.

Oliver was the kind of man who had never understood the status accorded to Hamlet. For him, thought and action were one and the same thing. Even as he went upstairs to search the bedroom cupboards for clothes, the beautiful idea was forming itself in his mind to the last detail.

Gordon had arrived back in time to witness Portia’s blazing row with her parents.

‘He is not like all men!’ she yelled at Hillary. ‘Don’t you dare say that!’

‘Probably saw some of his friends going to Harrods and forgot all about you,’ Peter offered. ‘His type are like that. No sense of loyalty. Look at how they behaved in Palestine. Look at Ireland. Well rid of the chinless ass if you ask me.

‘Palestine? Ireland? What has Palestine got to do with anything?’

‘Hey, hey, hey!’ Gordon cooed as Portia flung herself onto his chest. ‘Cool it, Pete. Can’t you see that she’s upset? What’s up, Porsh? You and Ned have a fight?’

‘Of course not,’ she sobbed. ‘Oh, Gordon, he’s disappeared!’

‘Disappeared? How do you mean?’

‘I mean disappeared. Vanished. I ... I went for that job interview. He was supposed to be down in the street waiting for me when I came out, but he wasn’t. And he wasn’t at his father’s house in Catherine Street either. I hung around outside for hours but there was no sign of him. And then I thought perhaps he might have phoned here, so I came home as fast as I could, but there was no message, nothing. And anyway,’ she said, rounding on Peter. ‘What do you mean chinless? Ned’s got a wonderful chin. What’s more, he doesn’t have to hide it under a scraggy moth-eaten beard like some people.’

‘Well we won’t know that for sure,’ said Peter, folding open the Morning Star with a flourish, ‘until he’s old enough to grow a beard, will we, pet?’

‘An appalling way to treat someone,’ sniffed Hillary. ‘As a matter of fact, it’s a kind of emotional rape. It is. It’s rape pure and simple. Rape.’

Portia turned towards her mother and snarled.

‘Okay, okay,’ said Gordon, laying a placating hand on Portia’s shoulder and pulling her round to face him. ‘Let’s stay with it. Did you call yet?’

‘Call? Call where?’

‘Ned’s house. His father’s house. In ... Catherine Street, was it?’

‘Of course I called. I rang the moment I got back here.’

‘Nobody home?’

‘It just rang and rang,’ said Portia going over to the telephone, ‘I’ll try again now.

‘Seems kinda strange.’

‘I know it does. That’s what I’ve been trying to tell these two, but they won’t listen.’

‘What about his dad?’

‘I don’t have his number. He’s down at his constituency.’

‘Yes, chasing after innocent foxes, no doubt.’

‘It’s July, Peter!’ Portia shouted. ‘They don’t hunt in July!’

‘Well, please excuse me, your highness. I’m sorry I’m so shockingly unfamiliar with the delicate nuances of the social calendar. I’m afraid my time these days is taken up with trivial things like history and social justice. There just never seems to be enough left over to devote to the really important issues, like how the upper classes organise their year. I really must get round to it one day.’

Much of this fine speech was wasted on Portia, as she had stuck a finger in one ear while the other was pressed hard against the telephone receiver.

‘No answer,’ she said, ‘he’s not there.’

‘Or not picking up...’ said Hillary.

Gordon was itching to turn on the TV to see if there was anything yet on the news, but he knew that for the moment he would have to concentrate on behaving in his most tender, brotherly and concerned manner. This crisis for Portia, and the public scandal that was certain to break, would draw her closer and closer to him. He needed to play it slow, not rush things.

‘Would it help if I maybe went over?’ he asked. ‘To Catherine Street? You could stay by the phone in case he calls.’

‘Oh, Gordon, would you?’

“Sure, no problem.’

‘But suppose he phones after you’ve gone?’ Portia wanted to know. ‘How can I get in touch with you?’

‘I’ll find a call-box somewhere and check in every hour,’ said Gordon.

‘Be back by midnight,’ Hillary called after him. ‘If he hasn’t turned up then you’ll have to decide what to do in the morning. I’m not having you hanging around the street all night.’

‘Sure,’ said Gordon. ‘No problem.’

He wheeled his bicycle from the garage and set off towards Highgate, and Rufus Cade’s parents’ house, a pleasant evening of smoking grass and giggling at the news ahead of him.

Ned was tired, but strangely elated. There is no pain in talking to someone who is fascinated by every word you say. Once he had made the decision to tell Oliver everything, he had actually enjoyed .the experience of examining his memory so minutely. He was rather proud of the accuracy and the detail of his recall.

And what a story! He couldn’t wait to tell Portia all about it, if he was allowed to. He would tell his father for certain. And Rufus perhaps, who had been right there that very night. Oliver would probably have to question Rufus anyway, and the whole of the Sailing Club too. What a scandal for the school!

‘The cannabis in his pocket however, that remained a total mystery. Ned wondered if perhaps those Spanish students he had spoken to outside the college had seen the policemen coming up behind him and dropped the package into his pocket as a way of saving their own skins.

Oliver came back into the room holding a supermarket carrier-bag. ‘Details, details,’ he said. ‘My department, it grieves me to say, is an absolute bugger for details. Here you go, you can put these on in a second. I’m afraid yours got oil all over them in the boot of the car.’

Ned took the bag and looked inside. He could see a pair of Dunlop tennis shoes, grey trousers, a pullover and a tweed jacket.

‘Brilliant!’ he said. ‘Thanks so much.’

Oliver had set the tape-recorder running again.

‘Think nothing of it. Now then, you have a girlfriend I think you said?’

‘Yes. Portia. She doesn’t know anything about this. In fact, I’ve been wanting to ring her.’

‘All in good time. What does her father do, I wonder?’

‘Well, he’s a history lecturer at the North East London Polytechnic.’

Oliver could have hugged himself with delight. It was almost too much. A history lecturer! At the NELP, if you please...

‘I see,’ he said, ‘and just for the record, I wonder if you could give me his full name and address?’

‘Um, Peter Fendeman, 14, no 41 sorry, 41 Plough Lane, Hampstead, London NW3. But why...?’

‘Say that again for me, would you? Just the name and address.’

‘Peter Fendeman, 41 Plough Lane, Hampstead, London NW3.’

‘Excellent.’

Jewish too, by the sound of it. Oh frabjous day. When things fall into place like this, Oliver told himself, it doesn’t do to become arrogant. It is God’s work.

‘Ned you’ve been fantastic! I can’t tell you how sorry I am that we had to hoik you out here and put you through this nonsense. Look, I’ve got to hare up the motorway in the other direction from you, check out a few things in Scotland, so I’ll say goodbye. Mr Gaine can look after you from now on.

Ned took the outstretched hand and shook it warmly. ‘Thank you, Mr Delft. Thank you so much.’

‘It’s Oliver. And thank you, Ned. It’ll make a real difference you know. You should be very proud of yourself.’

‘But what about the drugs?’

‘Drugs, what drugs?’ said Oliver, lifting the spools of tape from the recorder. ‘The whole incident is forgotten, Ned. No, better than forgotten — it never happened. The police never picked you up, in fact they’ve never heard of you. They don’t know your name, they don’t even know what you look like. I promise you this, by tomorrow morning every record of your arrest will have disappeared for ever.’

And oh, if only you knew how true that was, Oliver said to himself. How wonderfully, wonderfully true.

‘Phew!’ Ned smiled as relief flooded through him. ‘If the press had heard about it, my father would have been ... well, devastated.’

Oliver checked his watch.

‘I’m afraid it may be a little while before you can leave. I’m taking the only car. We’ve sent for another though, and it shouldn’t be too long before it gets here. I’d get into those clothes now if I were you. Have a safe journey home and if you need anything, just ask Mr Gaine.’

The pullover fitted. There was that to be said. It smelled of rotten onions, but at least it fitted him perfectly. The jacket and tennis shoes were too tight by miles and the trousers seem to have been made for a five foot man with a forty-eight inch waist. Oliver hadn’t thought to include a belt, so Ned hunted around the kitchen looking for string. He found some in a drawer and drew it five times around his middle. He was picking up a knife to cut the string when he heard the door open.

‘Oh, hello, Mr Gaine,’ he said, turning with relief. ‘I was hoping you might...’

Gaine stepped forward. Before Ned knew what was happening his right arm had been twisted behind his back so high that the bone was wrenched from its socket. Ned screamed as much from the sound of the crack and pop as from the pain. He screamed again when Gaine’s enormous fist slammed into the side of his head, dropping him to his knees. But when Gaine followed up with a blow of incredible force to the back of his neck, Ned was already incapable of screaming any more.

Mr Delft had been right as usual, thought Gaine, returning the knife to the drawer. Nasty piece of work. Weak though, he said to himself, looking down at Ned’s unconscious body. Very weak. Like wrenching a wing from a chicken. Where’s the challenge in that? He heard the sound of a van in the driveway and, pausing only to deliver a heavy and pleasingly crunchy kick to Ned’s ribs, Mr Gaine made his way out into the hallway.

‘Oliver, my dear, what a delightful surprise. I do wish you’d let me know. I can’t offer you a scrap to eat.’

‘I’ve not come for lunch, Mother,’ said Delft, side?stepping her embrace. ‘I’ve come for a talk.’

‘Oh dear, that sounds positively horrid. Well, we’d better go up to the drawing-room. Maria is in the kitchen cleaning out the oven, poor thing. I had the most spectacular disaster last night, you wouldn’t believe. Two boys from Australia who do dinner parties. The highest recommendation and shatteringly good-looking, as so many queers are these days, but their soufflés exploded and Maria had to run out and buy that new American ice-cream that comes in fifty-seven varieties. Monsignor Collins was here and some frighteningly rich people whom I wanted to soften up before digging into them for the Oratory Fund. Heavens, there’s a terrible fug, isn’t there? Jeremy’s cigars I suppose. Shall I open a window?’

‘No, Mother, just sit down.’

‘Very well, darling. There!’

‘Where is Jeremy, by the way?’

‘At the office, of course. He’s been working like a Trojan lately. So long as he doesn’t overdo it like your poor father. Or like you, come to that. You’re looking awfully tired, darling. Positively hagged. Anyway, I think there s something rather good in the air, so if you know anyone who can buy shares for you, I would scoop them up as fast as you can.

‘Mother, how many times have I told you? It’s against the law.’

‘Oh, I know I was a bit naughty with Cohn’s airline, but this is family and surely that doesn’t count. Besides, Father Hendry told me in confession once that insider dealing as you call it isn’t the least bit of a mortal sin, it’s only a manmade one, so I really don’t think it can be said to matter very much.’

‘I tell you what, Mother,’ said Oliver taking up a position in front of the fireplace, ‘let’s cut all this dizzy Belgravia hostess nonsense, shall we?’

‘Oh, do move away from there, Oliver. You look like a Victorian patriarch. It’s too lowering. It reminds me of how Daddy used to stand when I’d been naughty. That’s better! Come and sit down beside me and don’t be so pompous. Tell me what’s eating you.’

‘Well, since you mentioned him, let’s talk about your father.’

‘Darling, what an odd idea!’

‘Not Great Uncle Bobby but your real father. We’ve never discussed him, you and I, have we?’

‘Is there something to “discuss”, as you put it?’

‘Of course there is. I’ve always known, you know.’

‘Always known what, dear?’

‘How you felt about him. How proud of him you’ve always been. I’ve seen it in your face the handful of times you’ve ever mentioned him to me.

‘Daddy was a very great man. A very great man. If you’d known him, you would have adored him. You’d have been as proud of him as I am. You are strangely alike in some ways.

‘I damned well hope not. The man was a traitor.’

‘You’re not to use that word. To die for your country isn’t treachery, it is heroism.’

‘But he didn’t die for his country, did he? He was English. One hundred per cent hearts of oak, village green, maypole and mutton English. There wasn’t a single drop of Irish blood in his veins.’

‘He loved Ireland and Ireland loved him! Loyalty to your country of birth is vapid and unremarkable. Only loyalty to an idea has meaning. You don’t understand the first thing about it. You wouldn’t recognise a principle if it stared you in the face. You would stamp it with your dull civil service stamp, push it onto a spike and send it off to be filed.’

‘I do recognise murder when I see it, however.’

‘Murder? What are you talking about? Daddy never murdered anyone in his life.’

Oliver took a white envelope from his pocket. ‘For you, I believe.’

‘Goodness!’ exclaimed his mother, reverting a little to her former manner. ‘How wildly exciting. What is it, an invitation?’

‘I believe everything is in place. You’ll note the little hair protruding from the flap. Open it, Mother.’

‘It doesn’t say that it’s for me ...

‘I have it on the best authority that it is to be delivered into the hands of Philippa Blackrow of 13 Heron Square and none other. Those were the exact words — well, exact enough at any rate. Believe me, Mother, it is for you all right, the gift of a dead man.

‘Dead?’

‘I’m afraid so. Paddy Leclare died two days ago. It was his last request that you should have this. Who am I to stand in the way of a dying wish?’

‘It ate into my heart when you applied to the Home Office,’ his mother said, looking sadly down at the envelope and twisting it in her hands. ‘I remember how excited you were when they accepted you, and I thought how ashamed I was that a son of mine could be so unambitious as to choose such a career for himself. It turns out I misjudged you. You are like your grandfather after all, only a mirror image, fighting on the wrong side and with every good quality reversed. Do you have a knife?’

Oliver passed over a penknife and watched his mother carefully slit the envelope open.

‘Ah, you’ve made a mistake there, darling,’ she said, with something like triumph. ‘The letter should be tucked in with the folded side up, how silly of you not to have noticed.’

‘At it happens I was not present when they opened it.’

‘When who opened it?’

‘Never mind.’

‘Well, thank you so much for delivering it, Oliver dear. What happens now? Am I to be arrested? Interned without trial? Shot out of hand? Escorted to one of your secret lunatic asylums and pumped full of thorazine perhaps?’

‘We don’t do that kind of thing, Mother.’

‘Of course, you don’t, darling. It’s just awful gossip and rumour. You don’t shoot to kill, you don’t torture, you don’t lie, spy, bug and blackmail either, do you?’

Oliver turned his head at the sound of a sudden creak on the stair. He strode quickly across the room and opened the door.

‘Ah, Maria, how can we help?’

‘Good mooring, Mister Oliver. I’m sorry, distrubbing you. I woss wunnering if you or Mrs Blaggro like maybe some cop of coffee? Or some bisskiss? I have bake many bisskiss.’

‘Thank you, Maria, no. If we need anything, we will come down,’ said Oliver, closing the door.

‘But such a sweet thought!’ his mother called over her shoulder. ‘Thank you, Maria, dear.’

Oliver closed the door, crossed over to the window and looked out over Heron Square. Through the balusters of the first floor balcony he could see a sparklingly clean turquoise Bentley manoeuvring into a parking space. In the central garden a game of tennis was in progress on one of three courts set aside for the use of residents. From most of the stucco façades that overlooked the square, national flags drooped from cream-painted poles. The houses here were so large and opulent that few were still in use as private residences, the majority served as embassies or grand offices.

‘I just want to know one thing,’ Oliver said. ‘Why? That’s the question isn’t it. Why? You have more than most people ever dream of. A rich husband who adores you, health, friends, luxury, status.., why?’

For Philippa Blackrow who had lived with her passion since almost before she could remember, the answer to that question was so clear in her mind that it seemed almost impossible to express. She lit a cigarette and looked up at her son, whose face was dark against the window.

‘After the British shot your grandfather,’ she said at length, ‘Mummy and I went to live in Canada to avoid the fuss. She died there when I was fourteen. The doctors never explained what it was, but I knew that it was what they used to call a broken heart. We seem to have lost that capacity of late, don’t we? Doctors have told us not to be so silly. Animals still die that way, but what do animals know? To this day I am sure that she would never have been taken ill if Daddy had still been alive. The British killed both my parents. Well, Mummy’s brother, my Uncle Bobby, adopted me and so I came back to England and became his daughter. He never let me talk about

Daddy. If I so much as mentioned his name I would be sent to my bedroom. Uncle Bobby was to be called Daddy and Aunt Elizabeth was to be Mummy. It was as if my real parents never existed. Daddy was the wicked brother-in-law that Uncle Bobby’s poor sister had been tricked into marrying and his name was to be struck from family history. I suppose they thought I would forget him, but I never did. The less he was mentioned, the more proud of him I grew and the more determined to have my revenge on the unjust, cruel and gutless regime that destroyed him. You think I have more than most people dream of? What other people dream of doesn’t matter. I always had less than I ever dreamt of. All I ever dreamt of was a family. A father and a mother. Most people don’t even need to dream of such luxuries, they take them for granted. That is what I used to dwell on, alone in my bedroom. I dwelt as all children do, on the injustice. Injustice is the most terrible thing in the world, Oliver. Everything that is evil springs from it and only a cheap soul can abide it without anger. You were named, you know, after the great Irish patriot, Saint Oliver Plunkett, who was betrayed on the lying word of Protestant perjurers and condemned to be hanged, drawn and quartered on Tyburn hill just there, at the top end of Park Lane.’

‘And there’s me,’ said Oliver, looking out over the rooftops towards Marble Arch, ‘thinking I was named after Oliver Cromwell, the very man who had him hunted down. You paint a very sweet, a very sentimental, a very Irish portrait, if I may say so, Mother, of dignified suffering and noble ideals, but I seem to remember that the Blessed Oliver Plunkett, as he was known when I was at school, by the way...

‘The Holy Father canonised him not long ago ...

‘Did he now? I must have missed the headlines. Be that as it may, my memory tells me that he died thanking God for giving him the grace to suffer and praying for the forgiveness for his enemies. I don’t remember reading that he shrieked down curses and swore bloody revenge on all the English. Would the sight of British children blasted into little pieces have made his heart rejoice, do you think?’

‘I do not expect you to understand. In fact, I would prefer not to discuss it further.’

‘I’m sure you would,’ said Oliver, turning from the window. ‘I can at least be grateful for one part of your childhood.’

‘And what might that be?’

‘Great Uncle Bobby’s adoption of you allowed my real ancestry to slip through the net, didn’t it? He buried your father so deep that it was never picked up when they vetted me for the service. Do you seriously imagine that the government would have given me a job if they had known I was the grandson of a Fenian traitor and spy, a friend of Casement and Childers and a proven enemy of the Crown?’

‘And now you will tell them, I suppose.

‘I’ll do no such thing, Mother. You were wrong when you described me as unambitious. You and I are the only people on God’s earth who know the truth and that is how it will stay. I have been busy making arrangements and you are one of them.’

‘Really, Oliver? I’m one of your arrangements? But that’s too tremendously intriguing. Have you worked it all out?’

‘You’ll send a message to your friends to tell them that Leclare’s last message to you was intercepted. You fear that you are being watched and have decided to lie low in the country.'

‘Have I decided that, darling?’

‘You have. From time to time I will visit you and you will furnish me with the names of every member of every bomb-making factory, every cell, every Active Service Unit, every safe house, every weapons cache and every recruiting officer, money-raiser and sympathiser you have ever heard of. The smallest shred of intelligence, rumour or gossip you have ever picked up in your long years of crime and betrayal you will pass to me. This will advance my career enormously and should fill your remaining years in the country with maternal pride.’

‘My bowels opened as you were being born,’ said Philippa. ‘For many years I used to wonder if perhaps in all the confusion the midwife accidentally disposed of the child and wrapped the shit in a blanket for me to feed. Now I know.’

‘A charming sentiment.’

‘And supposing I refuse?’

‘You really don’t want to do that, Mother. I am in a position to make life very difficult for you, for Jeremy, for your step-children and most especially, for the young man who was assigned to deliver that letter to you.

‘Who is he?’

‘You don’t know him, but you would adore him, I promise you. He’s suffering eternal torment like Christ on a crucifix, and all for your sins. I’ll give you a week, to explain to Jeremy that you have tired of the city and yearn for the rural peace of Wiltshire. And if you think you can feed me useless information mother, think again. I will take my chances and hand you in. You will spend the rest of your life as a prisoner in the hardest jail in Europe.’

Oliver walked across the square, humming ‘Lillibulero’. The sun was shining and the roads were giving off a pleasant smell of softened tarmac. Poor mother, he thought to himself, how she will miss London.





THE STARS’




He stopped off at the Berkeley Hotel to use the telephone.

‘News desk.’

‘This is the Provisional IRA. We have the son of the British war criminal Charles Maddstone. His clothes will be sent you as proof. The code is “Interior Interior Interior.” Good afternoon to you.

Handcuffed to a wooden upright, Ned sat on the floor of the van opposite two of the ugliest men he had ever seen in his life.

At the age of fifteen his collarbone had snapped during a game of rugby and he had supposed at the time that this was as far as pain could ever go. He knew better now. Every turn and bump that Mr Gaine negotiated, driving in the cabin up front, sent through him blinding surges of a pain so intense that at each wave of it, orange and yellow light flashed in his eyes, the blood roared in his ears and the very guts within him seemed to explode in shock. The pain grew from his shoulder, where a grinding back?ground ache radiated outwards into violent raging fires that scorched and spat into every corner of his body. The effort of holding still without tightening his frame as he breathed had prevented him from even trying to talk, but he could feel now that the van had joined a motorway and the smoother progress encouraged him to try a few words.

‘Mr Delft...' he began. The men opposite turned their eyes towards him, ‘Mr Delft said I was to go home ... he said I was ...

Mr Gaine swung the van out to overtake a lorry and Ned’s body slid forward, detonating an explosion in his shoulder that sent sheets of pain flashing and screaming through his body.

Five minutes later he tried again. ‘I’m supposed . supposed to go home...’ The words came out in a whisper.

?The men regarded him with silent interest for a moment or two, then looked away.

Ned had lost almost all sense of time and space. He did not know whether he had been left to lie for five minutes on the kitchen floor or for five hours. He could not tell how long they had been travelling or in which direction. The van was closed and windowless, and his only clue as to time was a feeling that the number of cars and lorries around them was increasing, which suggested the build-up of morning traffic.

He attempted speech again. ‘My shoulder ... it’s ... I think it’s dis ... dis ... I think it’s dislocated.’

Curiously, through the uncomprehending fog of his senses, Ned was still careful to be polite. He could have said that his shoulder had been dislocated, or even that Mr Gaine had dislocated it.

The men turned to each other.

‘You know how to put a shoulder back?’ one of them asked.

‘I’m not bleeding touching him,’ said the other. ‘The cunt’s cacked his fucking pants. Fucking stinks.’

Ned’s smashed nose, bubbling with blood, had not detected the stench that surrounded him, but he understood now why he felt a soft squash and slide between his buttocks.

‘I’m sorry ...‘ he said, tears dropping down his face. ‘I didn’t know. I’m so sorry, only

‘Give it a fucking rest, can’t you?’

‘Mr Delft said ... he said I was to go home. He’ll be angry.., and my father.., my father is an important man ... please, please!’

To stop the unpleasant whimpering, they took it in turns to kick him into unconsciousness.

It is not often that I confess to being baffled, but for a short while today the disappearance of Ned Maddstone struck me as the most complete mystery imaginable. It was as if he had been simply scooped off the surface of the earth. I am pleased, however, that I was able to work out the truth for myself.

I spent a frustrating night, raging against the system that had covered up his arrest. How typical, I thought, as each succeeding bulletin on the television, and subsequently on the wireless through the early hours, failed to disgorge so much as a scrap of news, how supremely typical. The police had been got to, it was clear to me. Some squalid Central Office lackey had swung into action and initiated a cover-up. I was tempted to ask Tom, in whose house I have my basement flat, if he knew anything. Tom works at party headquarters in Smith Square and is privy to all the gossip. I should know, I regularly read his paper?work when he’s upstairs drunk in his bed. I tamped down the desire, preferring not to have to answer questions. But it was frustrating to me that nothing of Ned’s arrest had yet emerged.

Rufus and I should have tipped off the press as well as the police, I told myself furiously, it was naïve of me not to have thought of it. I made a mental note to myself. One day, I resolved, I will put a sign over my desk—

This is, after all, England

—	and I shall make no important decisions without referring to it. Although it seems now that I may have done the police and the establishment an injustice, the sign over the desk is still a good idea.

In the normal course of events, Sir Charles had been due to arrive at Catherine Street at mid-day for a diary meeting. It seemed obvious to me however, given the lack of any news, that he must have come down the previous night to bail out his son and establish some kind of media blackout. None the less, I was determined to ensure the full involvement of the press somehow, even if it meant another anonymous call from a phone-box. First, however, I would have to see precisely how events had unravelled at Catherine Street. The prospect of Ned’s embarrassed explanations and confused protestations of innocence to his father filled me with delicious anticipation. Would he have been sent up to bed without any supper? Would he have been believed? I had decided to offer him exactly the same spaniel-eyed tactlessness and clumsy sympathy that he so crassly meted out to me.

Despite a great eagerness to be there as soon as possible, I took the tube to Victoria at my usual time of half past nine. While I would have loved to be there earlier, it was important not to show that I expected today to be anything more than a perfectly normal Friday.

As I turned into Catherine Street I was delighted to see a police car parked outside the house. Things were looking up. Such a sight argued against any concerted or coherent cover-up: at the most it suggested a very incompetent one. If the police had been got at they would hardly be there now, with an unmarked car outside the front door. Perhaps the Drug Squad were searching the place from top to bottom, I thought, hoping to enter and see floorboards up and books scattered all over the Bokhara. What an agreeable prospect. I looked up at the façade and fancied I saw a face pressed against the window of the first floor study.

I let myself into the house and mounted the stairs, preparing an expression in which I hoped that mild curiosity and impassive preparedness were nicely blended.

Sir Charles was at his desk in conversation with two policemen. I saw that Ned’s girlfriend, Portia, had been the face at the window. She stood at it now, restlessly turning her head one way and the other to look up and down the street, her breath misting the pane.

‘Ashley, thank heaven!’ cried Sir Charles, rising excitedly to his feet as I came in.

‘Sir Charles, what is it? Is there something wrong?’

‘Have you seen Ned?’

‘Ned? Not since yesterday, sir, no. Why? Has he gone missing?’

‘He hasn’t been seen since four o’clock yesterday afternoon!’

‘Good lord!’ I said. ‘But that’s bizarre ...

The policemen were eyeing me with curiosity and I bowed my head respectfully in their direction.

‘Gentlemen, this is Mr Barson-Garland, my researcher,’ said Sir Charles with a wave of the hand in my direction.

The two policemen half rose from their seats and nodded grave good mornings to me.

‘These kind officers are being very helpful, Ashley. But so far the thing seems to be a complete mystery.’

Very helpful? The Metropolitan Police should look to its policies on interdepartmental co-operation. I thought. The buffoons of the drug squad haven’t yet bothered to tell these poor flatfoots that they were holding Ned.

I had to confess that I hadn’t imagined that a minor offence like the possession of cannabis could warrant an overnight stay in the cells. But it struck me that on arrest, to save his father embarrassment, Ned might have refused to give his name. Perhaps such a lack of co?operation, allied to the arrogant Maddstone manner, had so annoyed the arresting officers that they had thrown him in a cell simply in order to teach him a lesson.

‘Have you tried calling the hospitals?’ I suggested. ‘Or police stations, even. If he was mugged perhaps, or...

‘Yes, yes,’ said Sir Charles, sitting down again. He had taken up the natural position of authority at his desk, with the policemen sitting respectfully across from him, caps on lap and notebooks in hand, like secretaries about to take dictation. ‘We have tried everything. A missing persons alert has been put out, every police station and hospital in London has been contacted. Officers from Special Branch will be here soon. There is always the possibility you see, given my position,’ he said, lowering his voice, ‘that the security angle may have to be considered.’

There was something in the way he said ‘given my position’ that reminded me forcibly of Ned. The same Maddstone-maddening apologetic ruefulness — as if status, authority and birth were embarrassing solecisms to be understood and pardoned.

One of the policemen turned to me. ‘When did you last see Mr Maddstone, sir?’

I considered the question. ‘Um, about mid-day, I should say. Let me see. I spent the morning working on correspondence...’ My eye travelled to Sir Charles’s desk, where the pile of post still lay, unsigned. ‘Those letters there, in fact. Then I left at ... what time did we leave, Portia?’

Portia turned from the window with a blank stare. I could see that she hadn’t slept all night and that the question hadn’t penetrated, only my calling her name.

‘I went off with your cousin Gordon,’ I reminded her. ‘To show him round Parliament. Do you remember? When was that, would you say?’

‘Lunchtime,’ she said in a dull voice. ‘You went off at lunchtime. And then you came back.’

‘Came back?’ I said, raising an eyebrow. ‘I don’t think ... oh yes, you’re quite right, though. I let myself in to pick up my briefcase at ... I suppose it was around three o’clock, but I didn’t see Ned then. You were both up ... you were both — otherwise engaged,’ I amended with care, winning the ghost of a smile from one of the policemen. ‘And then you were off to a job interview somewhere, weren’t you? What happened?’

The story tumbled from her. I could tell that she had told it many times, to others and over and over again to herself and that in the telling of it she hoped somehow for a meaning or clue to emerge. Ned had not been there when she emerged from her interview. She had waited around Catherine Street, gone home, phoned and phoned and then at seven in the morning she had finally managed to persuade a House of Commons official to telephone Sir Charles in the country. He had driven up and called the police, who had so far discovered nothing.

‘You’ll forgive me, miss,’ one of them said now. ‘But there were no bad words between you and Mr Maddstone, were there? No quarrel or anything of that nature?’

Portia stared at him. ‘Quarrel? Me and Ned? No, that was impossible. We have never ... we could never... We were like...’

Sir Charles went over to her with a handkerchief and put an arm round her shoulder. The policemen exchanged glances, then saw me looking at them and transferred their gazes down to their notebooks. All deeply affecting.

‘Is there anything that you think I could be doing?’ I said. ‘Anyone I should call?’

‘That’s very kind, Ashley, but I don’t think...’ Sir Charles began.

‘There is the question of the media, sir,’ said one of the policemen. ‘They can be very useful. Maybe Mr Barson-Garland here could call someone you know in the newspaper world.’

Sir Charles stiffened. The press were not his favourite institution. They liked to mock him for being ‘out of touch’ and for possessing an accent that made the Duke of Edinburgh sound like a filing clerk. They habitually referred to him as Barkingstone, Loonystone and Sir Charles the Mad.

‘Do we really think that’s necessary?’ he said worriedly. ‘Surely they would only—’

Any further consideration of the role of the press was put aside by a loud pealing on the doorbell. Portia gasped and, wriggling from Sir Charles’s grip, went to the window and looked down.

‘Oh. It’s just three men,’ she said dully.

‘That’ll be Special Branch, sir.’

Sir Charles stood alone on the carpet, suddenly looking every month his age. It occurred to me that he had put his arm round Portia to support himself as much as her.

‘I’ll let them in,’ I said.

And so the morning wore on. One nugget of news finally came through just before lunchtime and it puzzled me greatly. I relayed it to Rufus and Gordon over another pub lunch in the shadow of Big Ben.

‘It seems that the police paid a visit to the Knightsbridge College,’ I told them. ‘Apparently four Spanish students saw a blond English youth being picked up and driven off in a car. They can’t agree on whether it was a Vauxhall or a Ford and have been taken off somewhere to look at pictures of Ned.’

‘Bloody hell,’ said Rufus. ‘They’ll recognise him straight away.

‘I don’t get it,’ said Gordon. ‘The cops already know it’s him. They’re the ones who picked him up, for Christ’s sake.’

‘The more time that passes and the more policemen that get involved, the less likely it appears that they ever picked him up at all,’ I murmured, but Gordon was listening to Rufus.

‘That car was definitely a Vauxhall,’ he was saying with conviction. ‘No doubt about that. A T-reg Cavalier. And they looked like Drug Squad to me. Unshaven, leather-jackets, tattered 501s, Adidas trainers. Classic DS. It’s their idea of undercover. Pathetic, really.’

‘Christ, what a screw-up. You mean the Drug Squad are holding the guy and they don’t realise that he’s been reported missing? Maybe we should make another call.’

‘Gordon, that is a disastrous idea,’ I said. ‘Listen to me. You have to get it into your head that whatever kind of jeans and whatever kind of footwear favoured by those men we saw yesterday, they were in fact not the Drug Squad, nor any other kind of squad.’

I spent a very fervent quarter of an hour persuading the pair of them that for us to confess to any part in the business would only confuse matters.

‘It has to be a coincidence,’ I explained. ‘Ned has been kidnapped. That is the obvious and the only explanation. It just so happens that the kidnappers chose that particular time and place. If you think about it, it’s not as illogical as it seems. Yesterday would have been the first proper opportunity they’d’ve had for a long time. He’s been at school for months and then away sailing. But yesterday, yesterday they could have followed him and Portia from the house all the way to Knightsbridge, seen him left alone on the pavement and nabbed him. We saw the whole thing and of course assumed it was an arrest. In fact the police probably didn’t think our tip-off worth bothering with. Or,’ I added, ‘they heard Rufus giggling in the background and recognised it for what it was, a schoolboy hoax. In any case, it’s just a coincidence. Nothing more.’

It sounded pretty thin to me, but they bought it and chewed on it for a while. Gordon, as I thought he would be, was the first to see the flaw.

‘If he’s been kidnapped, why hasn’t there been some kind of ransom demand?’

I was ready for that. ‘There are kidnappers and kidnappers,’ I said darkly. ‘For two years Ned’s father was Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.’

Their mouths dropped as they took in the significance of this.

‘So now you see,’ I continued, ‘why we must lie low and not say a word. None of it has anything to do with us.’

‘Except that we witnessed it,’ said Gordon. ‘We might be needed for evidence...

‘Those Spanish students were right there, they can give plenty of descriptions. We were the other side of a busy street. No, believe me, there’s nothing we can add but confusion.’

I left the pub confident that I could trust them not to do or say anything indiscreet. I arrived back at Catherine Street and found that to gain admittance I now had to show my House of Commons pass to a policeman posted by the front door.

There is a chaise-longue in Maddstone’s office, all plush and gilt, the kind on which exotic princesses used to pose with panthers. I went upstairs to find Sir Charles slumped on it, the colour drained from his face. Portia was leaning against him, or he against her, and the tears were pouring down her face. It was clear that news of great import had broken while I had been away.

A man in his middle to late twenties sat on the desk, talking into the telephone. His eyes had taken me in as I entered the room and I had the unpleasant feeling that, lazy and pleasant as his inspection seemed to be, he had seen right through to the back of my soul and been unimpressed with what he had found there. An intelligence operative of some kind, I told myself, trying to shake the feeling off. No doubt a course of training in the perfection of that kind of look goes along with instruction in the use of code books, microfilms and cyanide capsules.

‘What’s going on?’ I asked.

Sir Charles opened his eyes and tried to speak. The man was completely in pieces. If this is the quality of our political leaders, I thought, then no wonder the country has gone to the dogs. You won’t find me cracking like that when I’m in power.

When I’m in power...

How strange. That’s the first time I’ve ever articulated such a thought. I have always told myself that I was going to become a teacher. How very strange. Now that I’ve written it down I feel pleasantly relieved. Perhaps I knew it all along. Well, well.

‘And you might be?’ said the man on the desk, gently replacing the receiver and smiling across at me.

‘Ashley Barson-Garland, I’m Sir Charles’s per?sonal assistant.’

‘Ashley Barson-Garland, Ashley Barson-Garland...’ he picked up two black notebooks that lay by the telephone. ‘What frightful handwriting our friends in blue have ... ah, yes, here we are. Ashley Barson-Garland. Says here you’re a researcher for Sir Charles and a school friend of Edward’s. But surely you must be at least twenty-two? Twenty-three perhaps?’

‘I shall be eighteen in two weeks,’ I said, flushing slightly. It has not been uncommon for new boys at school to take me for a member of staff and I dislike being reminded that I look older than my years.

‘My mistake. My name is Smith.’

Smith indeed. A deliberate insult. I went forward to shake his hand and he had the cheek to look into his palm afterwards and then to my face, causing me to flush again.

‘Well, Mr Barson-Garland,’ he said, and I would have found open revulsion infinitely less offensive than the expressionless way he now took a handkerchief from his sleeve and wiped it against his hand. ‘I’m afraid that while you were at luncheon some rather bad news came in...

The tone of ‘While you were at luncheon’ seemed to suggest that I had been guilty of some terrible, sybaritic dereliction of duty. In fact, Sir Charles had insisted that I get something to eat and the policemen with him had agreed there was nothing further I could do.

‘Bad news?’ I said, resisting the temptation to explain this and open myself to further humiliation.

‘… it seems that a call was made to the offices of The Times newspaper an hour ago claiming responsibility for kidnapping Edward Maddstone. We are working on the assumption that the call was genuine.’

‘But who? Why?’

‘The claim was made by a man purporting to represent the IRA. As for why ...

Sir Charles made a kind of moaning noise and Portia hugged him close to her.

‘Oh Jesus,’ I whispered. ‘I was right.’

‘You were right?’ ‘Smith’ raised his eyebrows in mild astonishment.

‘Well, the thought had crossed my mind,’ I said. ‘I mean it seemed a possible explanation, you know. Given, given.., everything,’ I completed, lamely.

‘What a sharp fellow you are, Mr Barson-Garland.

Well, perhaps you might employ some of that sharpness in making yourself useful, if you’ve a mind to?’

I nodded vigorously. ‘Of course. Anything.’

‘The Times will give us a little time to check out the information before they act upon it, but act upon it they surely will. I think perhaps Sir Charles and the young lady here should leave before the media circus arrives and all hell breaks loose. Perhaps you can think of a suitable bolt-hole. Where do you live, yourself?’

‘Tredway Gardens,’ I said. ‘It’s just a flat.’

‘And do you ah, share it with anyone?’ He put the question innocently enough, but again I had the impression that he had detected something in me that amused him.

‘Tom Grove. He works in party headquarters, it’s his house, I have the basement. Sir Charles’s PPS made the arrangement,’ I said, annoyed at myself for feeling the need to elaborate.

‘I see,’ said Smith. ‘Well, let us repair thither and that right speedily.’

‘I can’t drive a car I’m afraid...’

‘My dear old periwinkle, leave all that to me.

As I write this, Sir Charles is upstairs in Tom’s bedroom, asleep. The man Smith arranged for a doctor to come and pump him full of tranquillisers.

Poor Tom Grove has been warned away. Portia was driven off for further questioning half an hour ago, still hysterical with grief. Seems a little hard on her, but I dare say the authorities know what they’re doing. Smith himself has disappeared to ‘rattle a few trays’ somewhere, whatever that means, but said that he would ‘pop his head round the door’ sometime tomorrow, would I mind meanwhile ‘commanding the support trench’ — he really is insufferably pleased with himself.

The flat is now pleasantly calm, however, with no sign of the press anywhere. A part of me feels a little sorry for Ned, but another part tells me that, wherever he is and whatever is happening to him, it will do him a great deal of good.

Enough for the moment. I think I shall watch the six o’clock news now.

?No matter how strongly she fought it, Portia's evenings at home had fallen into a routine. She had tried for a long time to prolong a state of perpetual crisis by arguing with Pete and Hillary over everything and nothing, but over the weeks the outbursts subsided and life began to assume a normality that she was not able to resist, however much of a betrayal the very assumption of ordinariness in life might signify.

Were it not for Gordon, she felt she would have gone mad. With tremendous tact and psychological understanding, he had suggested that instead of waiting for news or continuing to sit by Sir Charles’s bedside looking in vain for signs of recovery, she could do Gordon a great favour by showing him the sights of London. All the crazy tourist shit, he meant. Stupid stuff that would take her mind off Maddstone Junior and Maddstone Senior at least for a few hours every day. He’d really appreciate it, he was starting to feel homesick and he still couldn’t find his way round the city.

Pete conceded that it would be cruel to hold her to any promise of working through the summer holidays and had provided enough pocket money for the two of them to buy summer travel passes and spend long days trailing around galleries, churches, museums and royal palaces.

‘I want you both to keep a notebook,’ Peter had said. ‘The architecture and building in London is a discourse on the movement of power and money. You’ll find it’s a kind of economic geology. From the church to the kings to the aristocracy to the merchant classes to the banks and finally to the multinationals. It’s like reading rock strata.’

Gordon and Portia took no notice of this and pressed the buttons at the Science Museum, giggled at the Yeomen of the Guard and tried to get the sentries in their boxes outside St James’s Palace to flinch or move their eyes, just like the other adolescent tourists they accompanied around London. Portia found that taking Gordon around her favourite art galleries and explaining the pictures to him was as close as she had come to pleasure for many weeks. It was something to be able to answer questions, to be needed and useful.

Pete never asked to see the notebook he had insisted on. His own time was taken up by his summer students at the polytechnic. One of them had flattered him into forming a discussion group for the analysis of British colonialism in Northern Ireland and Peter had bullied the Inner London Educational Authority into funding a visit to Belfast so that they could see for themselves what was happening ‘on the ground’, as Pete liked to say. Hillary, busy with her novel was happy enough in the belief that Portia was in the hands of a sensible cousin.

Twice a week Portia still went to visit Sir Charles. It was a relief to her that the press were no longer keeping up a vigil outside the hospital gates, but it was a sign too of waning public interest and that worried her. Events had moved on and the disappearance of the cabinet minister’s son had slipped from the front pages to smaller paragraphs inside until quietly dropping from the agenda entirely. At the height of the public fever, when the Prime Minister, cutting short her holiday in the south of France, had stood at the hospital entrance assuring the cameras that steps would be taken and revenge exacted, Ned’s kidnapping had been the sensation of the summer period known in journalistic circles — Portia discovered with distaste — as ‘the silly season’. But, as sightings of Ned dwindled and reports emerged that the IRA were now denying any part in the affair, the papers began to suggest that the whole thing had never been anything more than a family row, a teenage tantrum of the kind that went on every day. They resumed with relish the usual August parade of fifty-stone women, two-tailed dogs and string beans that spelled out ‘armageddon’ in Hebrew. The senior newsmen left Britain for their summer holidays, and the deputies minding the shop preferred not to mess with tradition. Besides, the only person worth interviewing would have been Charles Maddstone, and he wasn’t saying a word. To anybody.

The two massive strokes that had felled him during the week following his son’s disappearance had been so severe that doctors doubted he would ever walk or talk again. The first had completely incapacitated the left side of his body and the second had reduced him to a state of motionless coma. Portia found that her time at his bedside gave her an opportunity to talk without any fear of being misunderstood.

‘No news, Daddy,’ she would say, closing the door of the private room, drawing up a chair and offering the latest scrap of news. Calling him ‘Daddy’ gave her a secret and almost erotic thrill. ‘Someone was seen in Scarborough, but it was another false alarm.’

She would talk on, pouring out whatever came into her mind, every now and again finding opportunities to emphasise Ned’s name in a sentence and glancing across to see if that one mention might be the lowered rope to pull Sir Charles from the well of his unconsciousness.

One day, as she repeated to him for the thousandth time the story of the afternoon Ned had come into the Hard Rock Café with his friends, there was a knock on the door.

A doctor Portia had never seen before told her that he had spoken to Sir Charles’s sister, Georgina.

‘It may be time to consider switching off the life-support, he said, ‘and let the old fellow slip away.

‘But Ned is the next-of-kin,’ protested Portia, outraged. ‘It’s his decision.'

‘It’s been over a month. We must face up to the fact that there is no chance of any change. Miss Maddstone has said that she will think about it for a week before coming to any decision. I do not believe,’ the doctor added, ‘that you are a member of the family?’

Back home at Hampstead, Pete explained that any decision of this kind in a private hospital would be based on financial rather than clinical considerations.

‘It’ll be the insurance company, believe me,’ he said. ‘That kind of twenty-four hour intensive care is expensive. The money men will be the ones clamouring for the machines to be switched off.’

Gordon was surprised to hear this. ‘I thought England had a public health system.'

‘A public health system?’ Pete snorted. ‘That’ll be the day...’

Oh, God, here we go, thought Portia. Gordon should have known better than to walk into that one. There’ll be no stopping Pete now.

In fact, Peter was only warming up when Hillary came downstairs demanding to know what clothes he wanted to take on what he had been rather grandly calling his ‘Northern Ireland Fact Finding Trip’.

It always amazed Portia that her mother, such an ardent and devoted feminist on paper and in conversation, should spend so much time, when it came to the realities of everyday life, looking after Pete’s every need. From childhood on, Portia had never seen her father so much as pick up a sock, let alone wash one. Hillary cooked for him, shopped for him, washed his clothes and packed his bags, and not once had Portia heard her complain. If all men truly were, as Hillary had written so many times, rapists, it seemed odd to Portia that they should be waited on like Maharajahs.

As they discussed the wardrobe that would most make Pete look assured, supportive and at home on the streets of West Belfast, Gordon came up to Portia and suggested they leave Pete and Hillary and go for a walk somewhere.

‘All right then,’ she said. ‘Let’s go to the Flask. You’ll like it.’

‘What is that, some kind of park?’

‘It’s a pub. You’ll like it.’

Gordon knew perfectly well what the Flask Inn was, since he had already been there twice in the company of Rufus Cade. He wanted Portia to have the pleasure of introducing him to it, however. He discovered early on that the more helpless and ignorant he appeared, the more she liked it. Gordon was used to that. Most of the girls he had known back home had been the same.

‘You guys make sure you’re back before eleven,’ Hillary insisted. ‘In time to say goodbye to Pete.’

A loud pealing came on the doorbell as they left the room and Portia’s heart gave a little jump. She had learned not to get too excited by the sound of the door or the telephone, but one day soon a call would come and it would be the call. You never knew...

‘And see who that is,’ Pete shouted after them. ‘If it’s not important, we’re out.’

As they went downstairs, a huge bang shook the front door as if a car had slammed into it. An even louder one followed and the whole hallway shuddered. At the third bang, the front door splintered off its hinges and fell inwards with a crash, shattering the floor tiles and rocking the staircase. Three men in gasmasks and body armour stepped through.

At precisely the same time, to the very second, there came a delicate tinkle of broken glass in the sitting room above, followed by the thumping hiss of tear gas canisters and the shrill terrified screams of Hillary and Pete.

Dr Mallo was a very simple man. He approached life rationally, not empirically. The horizons of his world were narrowly confined and this afforded him, he believed, more happiness than that granted to the majority of his fellow creatures. The young Englishman in front of him now, for example, was of no interest to him at all. The trained psychiatrist in him recognised the submerged tension, emotional sublimation and signs of erotic shame in him as a matter of course, but only the paperwork and money being laid on the desk were worthy of scrutiny and serious attention. Where the man came from, the source of his money, the authority behind the documents he produced and the reasons for his neuroses were questions that only an empiricist or — worse still — a psychologist, would ask. The only questions Dr Mallo considered worth asking were questions of authenticity, quantity, reliability and seriousness of purpose.

‘This money,’ said Dr Mallo, ‘is good for one year of treatment. Also, with the current weakness of the pound, what you have given me is, I regret, too little by approximately one and one quarter percent.'

Oliver Delft took a thick wad of twenty pound notes from his pocket. ‘The case is a severe one,’ he said. ‘Regular sums will be paid into a bank of your choice, annually or quarterly. I believe this procedure is agreeable to you? Unluckily, as you know, this is not the first time my family has had occasion to avail itself of your services.’

‘Sometimes these problems lie deep within genetic inheritance,’ said Mallo, watching the money being counted onto the table. ‘Enough, one hundred and forty is fifteen pounds too much. Be pleased to sign here and here. I can offer change for you in dollars US or francs Swiss.’

Oliver replaced the roll of money and took the proffered pen.

‘Dollars, if you’d be so kind.’

‘I note,’ said Dr Mallo, ‘that your unfortunate brother has no name.

‘I’m afraid you will discover that he has many,’ said Oliver with a rueful smile. ‘Last year he was the rightful heir to the Getty fortune. He kept that one up for over six months, almost a record. In his time he has been.., let me see, Margaret Thatcher’s secret lover, he has been an abused orphan, a Palestinian gunrunner, a member of the Danish royal family — frankly, you name it, he’s tried it.’

‘You don’t say?’ murmured the doctor. ‘And at the present time?’

‘It’s back to politics. Thinks he’s the son of an English cabinet minister called Maddstone. Won’t answer to any name but Ed. Or is it Ned? No saying how long it’ll last. He gets it all from the newspapers, of course. The real Maddstone boy was snatched by terrorists two days ago. Dare say you’ve read about it in the papers?’

Mallo gave no answer.

‘Anyway,’ Oliver continued, ‘that’s the current delusion. It’s sad to have to give up on the lad, but we just can’t cope with him any more I’m afraid. He’s young, extremely fit and capable of terrible violence. He’s done some appalling things to the family. Quite unforgivable things. You wouldn’t credit it to look at him, but then I believe that’s often the way.’

‘Indeed so.’

‘I understand also that this kind of mania is generally somewhat intractable. Permanent often, I believe.’

‘Sometimes it is regretfully true, patients seldom respond quickly. If, however, some improvement were noted...?’

‘I think it very unlikely,’ said Oliver. ‘But if the family’s circumstances were to change in any way and we found ourselves willing to give him another chance we would of course be in touch with you in the usual manner. Otherwise

‘Otherwise, sir, you may trust that he will receive the highest quality of care. In the event of demise ...

‘He is very dear to me, I trust that you and your staff will ensure that he lives a long and, in so far as he is able, happy life. My father and uncles assure me that you are to be relied upon in this respect.'

‘Naturally we are to be relied upon,’ the doctor assured him. ‘Our diet and exercise regimes here are of the highest standard. You will be pleased also by the seriousness with which we regard issues of hygiene, safety and general health. Besides, we are subject to rigorous inspection from the authorities. There are patients who have lived happily amongst us for more than thirty years. Indeed we have three men who were placed here by your.., grandfather.’

‘You’ll find that the company and conversation of other people excites him,’ said Oliver, rising. ‘They feed his delusions. You may find it best to keep him on his own until he is a great deal calmer. Let the memory of his old life fade away.

‘Of course, of course, you may depend upon it. And when shall we expect the pleasure of receiving him?’

‘My friends will arrive here with him some time later this afternoon. I wish I could stay to see him settled in, but pressure of work I’m afraid...’

‘Really, I quite understand. If there’s nothing more you wish to see, a car will take you to the airport directly.’

Ned awoke from a dream of rivers of gore and spittle pouring from Paddy Leclare’s mouth and knew at once that the movement under him was of a sea in full swell. He tried to open his eyes. For a moment it felt that they had become glued tight by blood and sweat, before he realised that they were indeed wide open. It was simply that there was nothing to see. Either he was in a place where no light shone — not the smallest reflection of anything — or he had become stone blind. Some instinct told him that he was not blind but enclosed in a vacuum of absolute darkness.

While the grinding ache in his shoulder socket hung like a black cloud over his every conscious moment, he found that he could foreground each of his other torments. He could concentrate separately on the hot pain of the torn skin around his wrists for example, on the nauseating throb of his smashed nose or on the stabs of a broken rib that pierced his lungs with each breath or movement. These tortures feasted on him like a swarm of angry wasps, yet behind them all, the shoulder, nagging like an evil memory, rasped and grated against its socket with relentless cruelty. But behind even the sick torment of his ruined shoulder, terrible as it was, other agonies raged that were harder yet to bear, the agonies of bewilderment, loneliness and naked fear.

Ned’s mind was so closed in by terror and confusion that he became less and less able to make sense of any past or present identity. In delirium and over the course of hours that might have been minutes or days, he reached out with his mind to every image that had ever been sacred to him, his father, cricket, a yacht skiffing in the wind, his best woollen blazer, hot porridge lightly salted, the sound of the school bell at evening — the images came randomly —a pair of silver hair-brushes he had found in a jumble sale and polished to perfect brightness, the gear wheels on his first bicycle, the sharp sour stink of National Geographic magazines, cold milk, freshly sharpened pencils, his naked body in the mirror, gingerbread, the clatter of hockey-sticks at bully-off, the smell of a record-duster.., yet each picture that he fixed upon flew from his mental grip, and, like soap from a closing fist, the harder he tried to force them the further they leapt away.

The image above all others that he had saved from bringing into the open could at last be denied no longer, and he conjured up Portia to be with him. But she would not come. Her handwriting, her laugh, the shining warmth of her skin, the grin of animal wickedness in her eyes —they had all gone.

Now only Christ was left. Christ would come to him and lift him from this empty despair. Ned’s torn lips could barely close on the words of his prayers. He asked for pity and hope and love. He asked for a sign that he had been heard. And then, all at once, Jesus rose and floated before him, glowing with light. Ned looked into the gentle, loving eyes of his saviour and leaned up to be taken into his arms and away from this terrible place. With a snarl of fury, Satan sprang forward and opened his huge mouth. He tore the Son of God into bloody pieces and turning towards Ned with a roar of triumph, he closed his black jaws around him.

Ned awoke again in darkness to the sound of the van’s engine and the swift hum of passing traffic. Perhaps he had imagined the sea.

All that he had to connect him to reality now were his pain and the rhythmic flip of tyres on tarmac road. It was as if he had been reborn, reborn into a churning waste of unending isolation and pain. Every instant seemed to contain an eternity of suffering that flung him further away from what he had been and further towards a new existence in which friendship, family, future and love Gould never have a part.

Later he imagined that he had been inside a white room. He recalled a glare of fluorescent light and the rising stench from him as a scalpel cut the string from around his waist and his trousers fell to the floor. He thought he had felt a sharp sting in his arm, a quite new slam of pain and a jarring thump in his shoulder, streams of warm water washing over him and strong arms bearing him away.

He awoke once more to find himself on a bed in a small room whose every surface had been painted cream. The door, walls and ceiling, the tubular steel at the end of the bed, the bars on the single window and the clouds in the sky beyond — all were cream. He couldn’t tell the colour of the floor because the room was small and something was pinning him tight to the bed. When he raised his head, stretching the nape, he could see two thick belts of black webbing strapped across his chest and legs, each fastened by what appeared to be seat-belt buckles. But when he raised his head, the muscles in the back of his neck burned and the broken ribs shifted and clicked inside his chest, so instead he lay back and let the general ache of his body comfort and console him. He was calmer now and almost frivolously cheerful. The black torrent of his nightmares had subsided and the stupidity of his situation was starting to entertain him.

He dozed for a while and awoke with the bedroom still washed by the same creamy daylight. The skin in the arm below his good shoulder itched and a memory surfaced of the first of the straps having at some time been unbuckled, hands forcing him to sit upright and a needle pricking his skin. He believed that he had woozily murmured ‘Good morning’ and ‘Thank you’ before falling asleep again. He stared at the cream ceiling and attempted to assemble his thoughts. Before he could do so he heard the sound of footsteps squeaking on a shiny surface. Ned raised his head an inch from the pillow as they approached. A door close by opened and closed, and Ned sank down again.

Keys rattled in the lock and Ned started awake, annoyed with himself for having slipped off again.

‘Hello there, young sir! Feeling much better now, I am sure.'

A plump little man in a white dentist’s tunic came into the room, smiling and twinkling. He had spoken with an accent that Ned could not place. A very tall and elegant younger man with white-blond hair and pale blue eyes stayed in the doorway, holding in his hands a steel bowl.

‘You have been most unwell, my chap, and we are here to see that you may become better and stronger.’

Ned started to speak, but the plump little man raised a hand.

‘No, no. There will be time for us to talk a little later on. My name is Dr Mallo and we will have many good chats, I promise you. But now I want you to know that Rolf will be looking after you. You have done a great amount of harm to yourself and we must give your body some time to be healed. Rolf can help you with your pain...’ he gestured to the tall man who came forward, holding out the steel bowl with outstretched arms like a communion server offering the paten, '... and in gratitude for this, I hope you will be very calm and not disturb yourself, yes?’ Ned nodded and watched as Dr Mallo took a syringe and a glass phial from the bowl.

‘Excellent, this is excellent. You are a good fellow.’

Rolf stooped down to loosen the strap around Ned’s chest. Ned forced himself upright and watched the doctor push the needle into the cork top of the phial.

‘But this is very fine! Already you sit up on your own!’ Dr Mallo beaming with approval, raised the loose sleeve of Ned’s gown and rubbed cotton wool on the upper arm. ‘That is cold, I know. Now, Rolf is more in practice with needles than I, but I am hoping this will not hurt... So! It was nothing.’

Ned lay back again and immediately a warm surge of calm flooded his brain. He smiled up at the doctor and at Rolf, who was bending over the bed and buckling the straps.

‘S’nice... s’very nice. Z’lovely...’

Dr Mallo beamed again and moved round to the other side of the bed. ‘And your shoulder is not so hurtful?’

‘It’s fine,’ murmured Ned, his mind floating happily. ‘I can’t feel a thing.’

‘We have strapped him tightly for you. You are young and he will mend very nicely, I think. So. Sleep now and stay at peace.

Ned could not remember either of them leaving the room and when he next awoke, it was nearly dark.

Over the next few days Ned tried his best to exchange even the smallest number of words with Rolf, who visited at regular intervals with his steel bowl and syringe, sometimes bringing with him fresh dressings, a plastic bottle to urinate into and flasks of soup which Ned was only allowed to drink through a shiny steel tube.

Rolf proved entirely uncommunicative. Ned decided that he couldn’t speak English. Dr Mallo, whom he had not seen since, had spoken with an accent that might have been German or Scandinavian, so it seemed logical that Rolf too was foreign.

No, Ned was the foreigner. Wherever he might be, it was far from England. The black nightmare of his day or days in the pain and dark was proof of that. Distant seagull cries gave Ned the impression that he was close to the sea, perhaps even on an island. Some instinct told him that he was somewhere north. Perhaps it was the nature of the light that made him so sure, perhaps it was his interpretation of Dr Mallo’s accent, which he now believed may have been Scandinavian. That would accord too with the sharp blue of Rolf’s eyes and the silver blondness of his hair.

Ned began to use the periods of physical pain and mental clarity that attended him for the hour or so before each injection to consider his circumstances. He decided after a while that it was not the nature of the light that told him he was in a northern country, it was its steadiness, its constancy. No matter at what time Ned awoke, the sky outside his window was always bright, or at the most in a state of gentle twilight. At this time of year, Ned knew, the farther North you travelled, the shorter the hours of darkness. The night he had sailed on the Orphana for Oban, the night Paddy died, it had been dark only for the briefest time.

Ned was sure that Oliver Delft’s colleague, Mr Gaine was mad or criminal. He had beaten and broken Ned and taken him away with two evil, ugly, violent and malevolent psychopaths whose dead and brutal eyes would haunt Ned for ever. He had arrived here, where he was being treated kindly and with consideration, yet kept tied to his bed in a locked room with bars on its window. What could that mean?

Somewhere, Oliver Delft and Ned’s father would be looking for him. Perhaps Mr Gaine was demanding a ransom. Ned was sure enough of Delft’s skill and his father’s influence to feel confident that he would not get away with it.

But meanwhile, what could his father be thinking? And Portia, what of her?

He was puzzled that it should be so, but it was his father, not Portia, who visited him in the loud and vivid dreams that filled his sleeping hours. In his waking moments, when he pictured what he would do when he got back, when he thought of home and school and the places and people that he knew, Portia’s image was never there. Ned was not wor?ried that he had to force her to his mind. He supposed that he was frightened she would have been angry at his disap?pearance. She might have believed that he had run away from her. Perhaps she even feared that she had disap?pointed him somehow during their afternoon in his bedroom and that he had escaped like a coward at the first opportunity. When this whole nonsense had been cleared up Ned would take her away to a country inn and they would get to know each other all over again.

For the moment, Ned hoped that Rolf might at least bring him something to read. When his straps were loosened, he could sit up easily now and he believed he could move his right shoulder and the muscles of his upper body well enough to handle books. Reading would help pass the time, which was beginning to hang more and more heavily as the pain receded and the drugs began to have less and less hold over his mind. Besides, the school had given him a reading list at the end of the summer term and Ned didn’t want to be left behind.

He started to ask Rolf each time he came.

‘Morning, Rolf. I was thinking... Are there any books here, by any chance?’

‘Rolf, I can definitely move well enough to read now...

‘It doesn’t matter what kind of books, really, but if you could find some on European history...'

‘Perhaps you could ask Dr Mallo what he thinks, but I really believe it might help me to get better...

‘Did you ask Dr Mallo? What did he say?’

‘Rolf, please! If you can understand me, can I have something to read? Anything...’

‘Rolf, I want to see Dr Mallo. Understand? You ... tell... Dr Mallo... come to me, yes? Soon. I see Dr Mallo. It’s very important...’

Anger began to boil up inside Ned and anger forced him into a terrible mistake. It was impossible, he decided angrily during his endless hours of isolation, that Rolf could have failed to understand him. He was being deliberately cruel.

One morning, he could take it no longer.

‘What has Dr Mallo said about my books? Tell me.’

Rolf continued his methodical routine of loosening the straps and preparing for Ned’s injection.

‘I want to know what Dr Mallo has said. Tell me.’

Rolf handed him an empty urine bottle without a word. Ned, seething with the bitter injustice of it all, passed the bottle under his bedclothes and began to fill it, anger rising and rising within him.

Rolf leaned forward with the syringe and Ned, maddened as much by the calm routine as by the silence, pulled the bottle up and threw the contents into Rolf’s face.

For at least five seconds, Rolf stood completely still and allowed the urine to drip down his face and off his chin.

Ned’s temper subsided in an instant, and he tried unsuccessfully to smother a laugh. Rolf bent slowly down and replaced the syringe on the trolley, picked up a towel, folded it carefully into four and started to pad his face. There was something in the cold impassivity of his demeanour that turned Ned’s laughter to fear and he started to babble apology like a three-year-old.

‘Please don’t tell Dr Mallo!’ he pleaded. ‘I’m sorry, Rolf, I’m sorry! But, I just wanted to ... I’m so sorry, I didn’t know what I was doing...’

Rolf replaced the towel on the trolley and straightened up. He looked at Ned speculatively, without a trace of visible anger or concern.

‘I don’t know what came over me, Rolf. Please forgive me!’

Rolf beckoned with his hands for Ned to lie down, the usual gesture he made to show that he was ready to fasten the straps.

‘But what about my injection? My injection, Rolf...’

Rolf snapped the buckles and looked down at Ned, his head cocked to one side.

‘Rolf, I’m really sorry, I promise ...

Rolf placed both hands, one on top of the other, flat on Ned’s shoulder and pushed down, his whole weight behind it, like a baker pressing dough. The ball gave a crack as it jumped from its socket.

Rolf gave a little nod, then turned and wheeled the trolley from the room. Within a few hours Ned had lost his voice. The screaming had torn his throat to shreds.

Over the eternal days that followed he lay alone and whimpering. Unvisited, undrugged and soaked in his own sweat and urine, he had nothing to turn his mind to but two terrible facts and one impossible question.





THE STARS’




Firstly, Rolf had not lost his temper. If he had done what he did in the heat of the moment, while Ned was laughing right in his piss-streaming face, there might be some possibility of reconciliation or appeal. The violence would have been terrible, but human.

Secondly, and Ned wept and wept at the cruelty of this, Rolf had quite deliberately set to work on Ned’s good shoulder, the left. The right shoulder, still recovering from its earlier mauling, he had left alone. Such implacable, methodical malice offered no hope at all.

Thirdly came the question: a question that grew and grew inside him as he whispered it to himself over and over again.

Why? What had been his offence? In the name of Jesus ... why?

The Island

III

Finally, finally, finally, finally.

Paper.

Two pens.

Felt-tipped, to stop myself doing damage to myself. To stop myself doing damage to somebody else.

It is very difficult to describe how they feel in the hand. I have not held a pen for a long time. I am taking an age to complete each word. I put myself off by watching my hand so closely that it becomes self-conscious and forgets how to shape the simplest letters.

I have been having the same trouble with my voice.

Sometimes days go by and I do not say a word. I am afraid of talking to myself. Sometimes I hear other voices shuffling past and they sound like mad voices. I do not want to sound like this.

When I do decide to talk to myself I make sure that what I say is ordered and sensible. ‘Today I shall do three hundred press-ups before lunch and five hundred press-ups after lunch,’ I might tell myself. Or, ‘This morning I shall run through the Lord’s Prayer, the General Confession, all the hymns I know and every capital city I can remember.’ And I remind myself out loud that I must not despair if I forget. Frustration and disappointment are the enemy, I have found. Some time ago I forgot the capital of India. It seems stupid, but for the longest time I was weeping and screaming, punching myself on the chest and wrenching at my hair so violently that it came out in bloody knots, and all because I could not remember the capital of India. Then, for no reason I can be sure of, I woke up one morning with ‘New Delhi’ on my lips. It had caused me such misery and pain, its absence, that I was almost angry to have remembered it, and for it to be such a simple place-name too. I know that the forgetting, even for a few days, had done more than make me miserable: it had given me spots and constipation and utter despair. I decided that in the future I would laugh and smile when I forgot even the simplest thing.

There was a time, for example, perhaps a year ago, when I forgot the name of my biology master at school. I laughed with pleasure. I actually made myself laugh with pleasure at the idea that my brain had buried Dr Sewell below the surface. Why should New Delhi or Dr Sewell be instantly available to me here? This way of dealing with memory has actually helped. Now that I am not forcing myself to remember, or judging myself by my ability to remember, all kinds of things actually stand out more clearly. I could sit down tomorrow, I think, and pass all my exams with ease. Mind you, looking up at the first two pages I have covered, I would have to admit that any examiner would disqualify me on the grounds of the illegibility of my handwriting. And of course, I know now that Dr Sewell was not my biology master at school. He and my school were imagined.

It is very interesting to look back up at what I have written. I notice that I keep trying to double letters. I even started to spell ‘disqualify’ with two Qs. I wonder what that means. I have a sense that it is something to do with a fear of finishing things too quickly. I have learned to eke everything out here. Each spoonful of food, each push-up, press-up, sit-up or organised room-walk that I undertake is very rigorously planned and very thoroughly thought through. Oh! Doesn’t that look wonderful! Thoroughly thought through!

... thoroughly thought through...

Oh goodness, the beauty of it! I never noticed how language looked on the page before. To foreign eyes that phrase must reek of English. I have spent huge epochs of time rolling words around in my tongue and throat for the pleasure of their sounds, but never, never before has it occurred to me that words might, even in my dreadful handwriting, look so beautiful and so eternally fine.

‘Thoroughly thought through’ sounds beautiful too, by the way. At least, said out loud in a lonely room it does.

I think what it means is beautiful as well, to one in my condition.

Well, I am looking at the paper I have covered and putting off the moment of writing coherently and consequently about myself and my situation for fear that I will do it too quickly and that the day might come when I find that my writing has caught up with my present and that I will have nothing more to report.

Consequently? Is that what I mean? I mean ‘in historical sequence’, but surely ‘consequently’ isn’t the word.

Chronologically is what I mean. They do come back to me when I relax.

Writing it all down chronologically will make me confront everything in a very different way I think. In my head and my mind, alone in this room, my life has become nothing more than a peculiar sort of game. Like any game it can be amusing and it can be deeply upsetting. On paper I suspect that it will take on the quality of a report. It will all become true and I cannot be certain what it will do to me when I know that it is all true. Perhaps it will send me truly mad, perhaps it will set me free. It is worth taking the risk to find out.

I will begin with time. I have taken, I think, five hours to write this much. I base all my calculations on shadows and food and counting. I have assumed that breakfast comes at eight o’clock. It doesn’t really matter if it is eight o’clock or seven or nine, all that matters is the passing of the hours, not what they are named. When I was in the school choir for a short time before my voice broke, we were taught to read music by interval. It didn’t matter whether the first note you sang was called a C or an F, it was all about the jump between the first and the next one, the interval. That’s what Julie Andrews taught the children, the ... I’m not going to get cross if I can’t remember their names ... the girls and boys she taught to sing ‘Doh Re Mi’ to. It is more or less the same with me and time. There’s a word for it. Tonic something...

So, let us say that breakfast is eight. If that is true then lunch is half past twelve. I know this, for I have counted the whole stretch of time between breakfast and lunch many times. One Mississippi, two Mississippi, three Mississippi, four Mississippi and so on. That was a very dark period: over the course of many many days and weeks I would lose count somewhere and the failure would set me weeping for the rest of the day. I began to believe that I was losing count deliberately because I did not want to be a master of time again. The day did come, however, when I had perfected the art of counting without dropping a stitch, as I called it, and I could be sure that four and a half hours passed between breakfast and lunch. I discovered that the count (when I was sure of it) was always between sixteen thousand and sixteen thousand five hundred Mississippis. Sixteen thousand two hundred seconds is four and a half hours, though you would be ashamed of me if you knew how long it took me to be absolutely certain of that simple calculation. Dividing by sixty and then by sixty again ought to be easy, but my brain found it hard to contain all the numbers at once.

16,200. It doesn’t really seem like that much when I write it down. Sixteen thousand two hundred. Does it seem more written in words or figures? Believe me, when you count them out, one by one, it seems to take hours. Well, it does take hours of course. Four and a half of them.

There is a single high window in this room and on the other side of it (I have jumped up when trampolining on the bed) there is a tree which I call my larch. I never really knew a larch from an oak at any time, but I think larches are tall and my tree is tall, so therefore it may as well be a larch. On winter days when the sun is low I can see its shadow move across the ceiling. I ought to be able to calculate a great deal from this, but I don’t know enough about the sun and the earth. I do know that when I start to see the shadows summer is over and the long winter is about to begin and that when the shadows fade away it is spring and the endless summer is close at hand.

I have attempted, as you might imagine, to count the days and weeks, but something is stopping me. I tried once to mark them off against the wall, using my fingernails but the act of it soon filed them down and I wasn’t able to continue. They always take back the plastic cutlery and I am sure that if I were to mark the walls with my felt-tipped pens they would be permanently confiscated. I could start now on the paper, with the prisoner’s traditional rows of soldiers and a line through them to mark the week, but the truth is, I don’t want to know how much time has passed. I cannot tell you how many winters and summers there have been. Sometimes I think it is three, sometimes as many as five.

There was a time when I thought I could detect when it was Sunday. There would be a brightness outside and an atmosphere inside that made me sure of it. The echo of footsteps seemed to ring differently in the corridors, which I suppose sounds mad. I would say to whoever brought in the food, usually Rolf or Martin, ‘Happy Sunday!’ but there was never any response. Once Martin, who for a short time I had decided was nicer than Rolf, said, ‘It is Wednesday today,’ and that upset me greatly for some reason.

I was moved into this room when my shoulders had mended. I have almost forgotten the first room, which might be a kind of mercy. I had been strapped to the bed there and was at almost my lowest point. Rolf would not speak to me. Dr Mallo would not come. My memories tormented me more than the pain. I still believed that it was all soon to end, you see. I thought that the father of my dreams would come and set me free, that the terrible mis?understanding was shortly to come to an end. I know better now. Dr Mallo has explained that this is my home and that I have no other. I have been ill. My mind has been full of false memories which only time can dispel. If I am slow with myself and patient I will be able to see things more clearly.

I am a very sick young man. I am a fantasist who has chosen to invent a history for himself which does not belong to him. A feeling of personal inadequacy has led me to believe that I once possessed a life of ease and affection and respect. I imagined that I was a happy, adjusted and popular boy with a famous and important father and a contented existence at a well-known public school. This is, apparently, very common. Many unfortunate children choose to inhabit a world like this rather than confront the reality of their lives. It is difficult for me because the fantasy was so real that I have burned out of my memory the real life into which I was actually born. I just cannot recapture or imagine it, no matter how hard I try. My assumed identity is so strong a part of me that even now, knowing the truth, I cannot fully let go of it. Dr Mallo tells me that mine is almost the strongest and most intractable case he has dealt with in all his professional life and this helps. It is hard not to feel a little proud.

The more able I am to accept the truth the easier my life here becomes. The paper and felt-tipped pens are a result of a ‘breakthrough’ that occurred some time ago. I see Dr Mallo every now and then. Perhaps these sessions are regular, once a fortnight, or once every ten days, it is hard to tell. Eight or nine visits ago I broke down and admitted to him that I knew I was not called Ned and that everything I thought had been my memory was indeed false, as he had been telling me for so long. Perhaps he thought I was saying this to please him, for at first nothing changed. In fact he was quite severe with me, accusing me of pretending to agree with him just to make life easier for myself. After a few visits however, he told me that I had made a genuine breakthrough and that this meant I could be trusted with a few privileges. I asked if that meant I might be allowed to read some books. Books will come later, he told me, for they can be dangerous to those with a frail grip on reality. Firstly, it would be a good idea for me to have some paper and pens and to write down everything I felt. If Dr Mallo trusted that I was really coming to grips with my situation, I might then start to visit the library.

What about other patients? Would it be possible for me to join in with them? I had noted evening and afternoon periods marked by an electric bell and always connected with the distant sounds of doors opening and closing, feet shuffling and sometimes a little laughter.

Dr Mallo congratulated me on my observation and held out the hope that one day I would be balanced and strong enough to associate with others without danger to myself. In the meantime, it was important for me to grow healthier in my mind. He is pleased that I have the self-respect that keeps me physically fit and hopes I will be able to set myself mental exercises that are the equivalent of the bench-presses and sit-ups with which I test my physical self.

So now I shall take everything very slowly and not allow myself to become too excited. I must not exaggerate any apparent improvement, for if I am honest, I have to confess that in my sleeping moments, and even sometimes when I am awake, the echoes of the old false memories still fill my mind like seductive ghosts. It will be of no use to me at all if I am over-optimistic about my condition. There is still a very long way to go.

I hear the squeak of the trolley outside. It will soon be time for my medication and supper. I must set down my pens, square the paper neatly on the table and sit up straight. I would not want Dr Mallo to hear that I have been overheated or undisciplined.

Von Trapp! Those were the children in The Sound of Music. You see! Things really do come back when you relax. The Von Trapp Family Singers...

This has been a wonderful and encouraging day.

‘So now, Ned my friend, how are you today?’

‘I’m very well, Dr Mallo, but I wonder if I can ask you something?’

‘Of course. You know that you can ask me anything you please.’

‘I think it’s wrong that you still call me Ned.’

‘We have talked of this before. I am very happy to call you what pleases you. Have you perhaps another name for me? A remembered name?’

Ned wrinkled his brow at this. ‘Well, sometimes I think I might be Ashley.’

‘You would like me to call you Ashley?’

‘I don’t think so. It isn’t quite right. I’m sure that I do remember an Ashley and that I think of him with someone like me. I associate the name Ashley with pretending to be something you aren’t, but it’s all a little confused. I don’t think Ashley is me. I was hoping you might think up a name. My real name may come back to me soon, but in the meantime, anything you give me is better than Ned. The name Ned is beginning to annoy me.

‘Very well. I shall call you...’ Dr Mallo looked around the room as if expecting to light upon an object that would offer a connection to a suitable name. ‘I shall call you Thomas,’ he said, after gazing for a while at a picture on the wall behind Ned. ‘How is Thomas? An English name I think, for you are an English young man. This we know.’

‘Thomas ...' Ned repeated the name with pleasure. ‘Thomas...’ he said again, with the delight of a child unwrapping a present. ‘Thomas is very good, doctor. Thank you. I like that very much.’

‘So we shall call you Thomas,’ said Dr Mallo, ‘but I need to believe that you understand the name. It is an escape from Ned, a symbol, we shall say, of a new beginning. It is important you are realistic with this name and do not imagine that Thomas has a past into which you may retreat. It is a name we have conjured up together here for convenience and to mark your progress. Nothing more.

‘Absolutely!’

‘So now, Thomas my young friend. How have you been?’

‘I think I’ve been well,’ said Ned. ‘I’ve been very happy lately.’

The sound of the new name in his ears was wonderful, it released a feeling to be hoarded and treasured in his room later. ‘Hello there, Thomas.’ ‘Thomas, good to see you. ‘Oh look, there’s Thomas!’ ‘Good old Thomas...

‘And at last,’ said Dr Mallo, looking at a tall sheaf of paper in front of him, the trace of a smile on his lips. ‘I am beginning to be able to read your writing without great effort.’

‘It is better, isn’t it?’ Ned agreed enthusiastically. ‘I find I can shape the letters so much more easily now.

‘And more slowly I hope? With less excitement?’

‘Completely.’

‘You are growing quite a beard now. Does it bother you?’

‘Well,’ Ned’s hand went to his face. ‘It has taken some getting used to. It itches and it must look very odd, I suppose.

‘No, no. Why should it look odd? A beard is a most natural thing.’

‘Well ...

‘You would like to see yourself in your beard?’

‘May I? May I really?’ Ned’s legs started to jog up and down on the balls of his feet.

‘I do not see why not.’

Dr Mallo opened a drawer in his desk and brought out a small hand-mirror which he passed across to Ned, who took it and held it on his jiggling knees, face turned away.

‘You are afraid to look?’

‘I’m — I’m not sure .

‘Set your heels to the floor and take some deep breaths. One-two-three, one-two-three.’

Ned’s knees stopped their jogging and he moved his head. He lifted the mirror from his lap, swallowed twice and slowly opened his eyes.

‘What do you think?’

Ned was looking at a face that he did not know. The face stared back at him in equal surprise and horror. It was a gaunt face, a face of hard cheekbones and deep-set eyes. The straw-coloured hair on its head was long, hanging lankly over the ears, the beard hair seemed coarser and tinged with a suggestion of red. Ned put a hand to his own face, and saw a bony hand rubbing the beard line of the face in the mirror and pulling at its moustache.

‘You like this face?’

Ned tried to avoid meeting the eyes in the mirror. They were resentful and coldly blue. They seemed to dislike him.

‘Who is he?’ Ned cried. ‘Who is this man? I don’t know him!’

The face in the mirror had tears streaking its beard. It licked its cracked lips. Its mouth pursed in disgust at the face of Thomas looking in.

‘That is enough. Give me the mirror now.

‘Who is he? He hates me! Who is he? Who is he? That isn’t me! Is it Thomas? It isn’t Ned. Who is it?’

Dr Mallo pressed a buzzer on the underside of his desk and sighed. Foolish of him to have tried such an experiment. A distasteful display, yet fascinating also. Such pitiable distress, such complete dislocation of subject. Mallo’s student dissertation on the work of Piaget came back to him. If he were still a man of academic energy there could be a paper in this. But Mallo’s days of professional ambition were behind him. He watched Rolf come into the room, wrestle the mirror away and snap bracelets on the boy’s wrists with the methodical efficiency that never deserted him.

‘Calm yourself, Thomas. You see now I hope that there is still a long way for you to go. We will allow you a period of calm for a while. No more writing for the time being, just peaceful reflection. Chlorpromazine,’ he added to Rolf, ‘75 milligrams, I think.’

Ned’s eyes were fixed on the hand-mirror which lay face down on the desk. He was not aware of Rolf pulling up his sleeve. His mind was filled only with a desire to see that haggard face once more and to tear its malevolent eyes from their sockets.

There were special days that came very rarely, days when the food was piled high on Ned’s tray and flower vases and bowls filled with fresh fruit were placed on his table. In the mornings Martin and Rolf would lead him out of the room and stand him under a shower at the end of the corridor. They would hold him there and sponge him clean. Then, still under the shower-head, but with the flow of water turned off, they would cut his hair and shave his beard. His room too, when he returned to it, would have been scrubbed clean and washed. The chamber pot would have gone and the sweet scent of pine room-freshener would hang in the air.

In the afternoons of these extraordinary days Dr Mallo would visit him, together with two others, a man and a woman who did not wear white coats and who brought the atmosphere of the outside world into the room with them. The woman’s handbag and the man’s briefcase fascinated Ned. They bore flavours and smells that were intriguing, enchanting and frightening too.

They all spoke to each other in a language that Ned could not understand, the same language that Rolf and Martin spoke and that he had decided long ago was Scandinavian. He heard his name mentioned in those conversations, always as Thomas now, they never used the name Ned any more.

The woman liked to talk to him sometimes.

‘Do you remember me?’ she would ask, in thickly accented English.

‘Yes, how are you?’ Ned would reply.

‘But how are you?’

‘Oh, I am much better thank you. Much better.’

‘Are you happy here?’

‘Very happy thank you. Yes. Very happy indeed.’

One day in summer they came again, but this time there were three of them. The same couple as before but with another woman, younger than the other, and a great deal more inquisitive. Ned picked up Dr Mallo’s tension at her questions and did his best to say what he thought the doctor expected and wanted of him.

‘How long have you been here, Thomas?’ This new woman’s English was better even than Dr Mallo’s and she spoke to Ned very directly. The others used to ask him questions politely, but never with the impression that they were especially interested in his answers. This woman seemed very curious about Ned and paid great attention to the way he replied.

‘How long?’ Ned looked towards Dr Mallo. ‘I’m not sure how long...’

‘Don’t look at the doctor,’ said the woman, ‘I want to know how long you think you’ve been here.’

‘It’s a little hard to tell. Perhaps three or four years. Maybe a bit longer?’

The woman nodded. ‘I see. And your name is Thomas, I believe?’

Ned nodded enthusiastically. ‘Absolutely.’

‘But when you first came here, your name was Ned.’

Ned found that he did not like to hear that name. ‘I was in a bit of a state then,’ he said. ‘I needed to clear up a lot of the ideas in my head. I had been imagining all kinds of things.’

‘Have you made friends with the other patients?’

Dr Mallo started to speak to the young woman, she listened for a while and spoke back at him rapidly. Ned imagined that he heard some words that were a little like the English words ‘Better’ and ‘Hysteria.

It was strange to see how small Dr Mallo looked, and how afraid he was of this young woman. His head was on one side as he listened to her, and he nodded and smiled, passing his tongue quickly over his lips and making notes on the clipboard he carried with him. It was something more than the woman’s height that made him look so small beside her Ned thought, even though she was nearly a foot taller than him. His whole demeanour reminded Ned of how he tried to look when he was doing his best to please Rolf or even Dr Mallo himself.

The woman turned to Ned. ‘The doctor tells me that you have chosen not to associate with any other patients since you have been here?’

‘I... I don’t think I have been ready.’

The woman raised her eyebrows. ‘Why not?’

Ned knew that he must not look to Dr Mallo for prompting or encouragement. It would please him more if he showed that he could think for himself.

‘I wanted to be more confident in myself, if you see what I mean. I didn’t want to lie to anyone about who I was. Also,’ he added, ‘I only speak English and I’ve not wanted to have the problem of being misunderstood.’ That last idea came to him from nowhere and he hoped that Dr Mallo would be pleased at his inventiveness.

There followed another flurry of conversation in which the other woman and her companion joined. Dr Mallo nodded his head decisively and made some more notes. Ned could see that he was trying hard to appear pleased.

‘I will see you again soon, Thomas,’ said the young woman. ‘I hope that the company of some English speaking people will be helpful for you. Will you promise me to try and talk to other patients? Just one or two to start with. Under supervision in case you become nervous. I think you will enjoy it.’

Ned nodded and did his best to look brave and resolute. ‘Good.’ She looked around the room. ‘You do not have any books here, I see.’

‘I have been writing again,’ said Ned almost defensively. ‘I have written some poems actually.’

‘No doubt you will write better poems if you have the chance to read. Books are always healthy. Goodbye, Thomas. I will see you on my next visit and I expect to see you with books in here. We will talk about what you have read and what friends you have made.’

That evening, when Martin came with his supper and to take away the fruit bowl and the vase of flowers, Ned almost whined at him.

‘That woman said I had to talk to other people. Is it true? I don’t want to. I want to be left on my own. Tell Dr Mallo that I don’t want to meet anyone. Especially not English people.’

‘You do as Doctor tells. If Doctor wants you meet other people, you are meeting other people,’ Martin replied. ‘Not matter if English or not English. Not your choosing. For Doctor to choosing. And here, look.’ Martin dropped an enormous English encyclopaedia onto the floor beside the bed. ‘You will read.’

Ned smiled himself to sleep that night. The lost memory came to him of a kind old man reading the Tales of Uncle Remus. Something about Brer Rabbit, the Tar Baby and the briar patch. He did not quite know why the story was relevant but he knew that it was.

Babe glanced up from the chessboard as Martin led a reluctant patient through the glazed partition and into the sun-room.

Smooth-shaven from yesterday’s official visit, Babe noticed. Another bloody Scandiwegian by the look of the blue eyes and flaxen hair. Frightened eyes they are. Mind you, fake-frightened perhaps. Wary and alert under the guise of compliance and the fog of Thorazine. I know that look well enough. Our man has been here a while and a day, I can see that. Knows how to play it safe. Now why have they kept him from us? What will be his big secret, we wonder? Been keeping himself fit all on his ownsome, that I can see. The full range of physical jerks. And talking of physical jerks, Martin will have tried it on with him, the lardy beast. Not got too far either, by the angry claw of his grip on the boy’s shoulder. Well, well. This is all something new to put the mind to.

Babe dropped his eyes to the chessboard and set up a high-droned mumble over the pieces.

‘Ah, and you’d try a semi-Slav on me, would you, you whore-master dog? I know a few ways to beat that...’ What a master of the slurred babble, you are, Babe, he added to himself.

‘You sit here,’ Martin said to the young man.

Speaks to him in English, by Christ! In God’s own blessed English tongue. Martin’s tortured approximation of it, I allow, but English none the less.

Babe almost gave away his interest by sitting up and looking across in their direction.

Calm down there, the Babe. There’s many a reason for Martin to be speaking in English. The boy may yet be Finn, Flem or Hollander. No certainty that he’s a Brit from Britland. It don’t pay to go leaping to conclusions. The lingua franca of all ritzy international institutions is English. Spoken in every high class bank, brothel and lunatic asylum from here to the Balkans.

The young man had sat down and was now trying to stand.

‘I say sit,’ said Martin, angrily pushing him down. ‘You sit, you stay.’

Why don’t you speak, boy?

Babe’s eyes were flicking from one chess man to another, his fingers pulling at his loose lips. No one would suppose that he knew that any world existed outside the sixty-four squares in front of him, certainly it would be impossible to guess that all his attention was on this awkward new arrival into the world of the sun-room.

Martin moved about, looking at the other patients while his patient fretted on his plastic chair.

‘May I go now please?’ the young man whined at last.

Angels and ministers of Grace defend us! More than a Brit. English! English as a maypole! English as torture! English as hypocrisy, pederasty and the Parliament of Fowles! Five wee words, but I can parse them and strip them of their code as easy as all thank you.

May I go now, please? Privately educated. A good school too, none of your minor drosses. Top drawer top three or I’m a fool, and I have never been that, as God is my whiteness.

F3, bishop-g2, castle short...

Winchester, Eton or Harrow?

Advance the c pawn, sacrifice him later for space on the queen’s side ...

Not Winchester, I believe. Too polite.

Exchange the bish for his knight and the black squares are mine...

Eton? I think not. Doesn’t quite have the carriage. That would never quit an Etonian, not even here. That leaves us Harrow. Semper floreat herga.

‘Babe, I’ve got someone for you to meet.’ Martin stood over the board and spoke in Swedish. ‘Don’t want to meet anyone,’ Babe muttered in the same language, clumsily enacting an exchange over the board and letting the pieces topple over. ‘Leave me alone.’

‘Never mind what you want, old man. His name is Thomas. You can teach him to play chess.’

Ned bent down and picked up a black bishop from the floor. Babe snatched it back and banged it on the board without looking at him.

‘Sit down and play at chess,’ Martin ordered Ned. ‘This is Babe. He is our oldest guest. Here before Dr Mallo even, is that right, Babe?’

‘Here before you were a watery drop of seed down your sinful father’s leg, you miserable perverted gobshite cunt,’ murmured Babe resetting the white queen with great care.

‘What’s that? What he saying?’

‘He says that he has indeed been here a long time,’ said Ned. ‘Look, Martin, do I have to talk to him? Can’t I please go back to my room? Or be on my own at least?’

‘You talk,’ said Martin. ‘I come back lunchtime. Sit down. You talk. You play chess. Be nice on each other.’

There was silence at the table for almost a minute as Babe set up the pieces and Ned sat down and concentrated on looking miserable.

Over Babe’s shoulder he could see a lawn that sloped down from the sun-room. At the bottom was a line of trees, whose thickness suggested the possibility of a river. There were other patients outside, sitting on benches and walking. That all this was possible amazed him.

The brightness of the room and the smell of other people mingled with the sour odour of sunlight on vinyl were intoxicating to Ned. He could feel Martin’s distrustful eyes upon him somewhere so he did not allow himself to appear eager for conversation, instead he slouched sulkily and glared down at the chessmen as if they were enemies.

What the old man, Babe, if Ned had heard right, had said right under Martin’s nose had thrilled him beyond imagining. He had called him a miserable perverted gobshite cunt and trusted to the slur in his voice and speed in his delivery to obscure the meaning. He might be a mad and ugly old man, but he was certain to be more entertaining than a lonely room.

‘That’s the ticket, old son,’ said the old man suddenly. His eyes were down on the table and he spoke in a mumble, but the words came clear to Ned’s ears. ‘You ye worked Martin out. The more browned off you look, the better he likes it. Don’t talk back to me right off, rest a hand on your chin to hide your lips and keep that spoilt, petulant look going. You do it to a turn.’

Ned’s heart began to beat more quickly. He put his elbow on the table and pushed his mouth into the upturned cup of his palm.

‘Are you English?’

‘Devil a bit I am.

‘Is Martin looking?’

‘Standing there with a cup of coffee in his hand gazing at the back of your head with a frown on him like an angry turd-wasp. Turned down his bedroom advances, did you, lad? No, no. There’s no call to go pink. He tries it on with all the new patients. Are you going to make a move? You’re not going to tell me they didn’t teach you chess at Harrow?’

Ned gasped and could not stop himself from looking up.

Babe was plucking his lips and staring down at the chessboard as if nothing had been said. He mumbled through his dribble in a sing-song. ‘It was wrong of me to spring it onto you like that. I’m a devil of a show-off and you’ll have to forgive me. But if Professor Higgins can do it, why not the Babe? Eyes down and make a move, you pampered Asiatic jade.’

Ned pushed forward a pawn and resumed his previous position, hand concealing mouth. ‘How could you possibly know? I mean... not that I am, not that I did go there. Have you been looking at Dr Mallo’s records? You’ve overheard me speaking to him?’

‘Calm yourself right down, young Thomas. Let’s not be rushing like a bull at the gate of a china shop. Or any kind of bull at all, whether at a gate, in a shop, or rising from the sea to rapine and lust. You’ll get used to my mad ways with metaphor and allusion in time. Just remember this, if we manage ourselves aright here today and for the next few days as well, then Martin there will leave us be and happy enough in himself to do so. He knows me for a mad old, strange old, harmless old, comic old, disgusting old man, but you he does not trust or like. He and Rolfie, they see it as their job to protect this institution from the foolish liberal credulity of the good Dr Mallo. If you have been allowed out to socialise, it’s because of the new girl who came visiting yesterday, or am I wrong?’

‘No, that’s right!’ Ned breathed.

‘Well now — dear God, you’ve a lot to learn about chess, young monkey. Have you never heard of a fork? —well now, I thought that must be so. She had reformer and new broom stitched into her milken breasts. Mallo and the staff will be madder than the maddest amongst us to have her interfere. If you’ve not been out to talk to us yet, there’ll be a reason and they won’t like being overruled by a liberal doxy with modern doctrines about her. Who put you away in this place?’

Ned was silent.

‘You not want to talk about it? I’ll never force you, boy.’

‘No, it’s not that. It’s just that I don’t know.’

‘Well, how long have you been here?’

‘I...’ Ned did not know what to say.

‘Easy to lose time. Do you have an inkling of the date it was when you were last a free man?’

‘It was July the thirtieth. But I was ill ... I thought all kinds of things. I shouldn’t really be thinking of that time. It holds me back. Dr Mallo told me that I had to forget all those associations, they are delusions

‘Delusions are the one things you may trust in here. July thirtieth, eh? And what year?’

‘Nineteen eighty,’ said Ned, excitement beginning to build in him, ‘and what’s more Thomas isn’t my name. My real name is

‘I don’t want to know. Not just yet. If they’ve changed your name, you don’t want to be heard telling me the old one. Make a move, go on. Make a move now. Try and get that poor bishop out of the shit, if you can.

Ned looked down at the chess pieces swimming beneath him.

‘I can call you Babe?’

‘Certainly you can call me Babe, and what pleasure it will give me to answer to the name spoken in a voice so fine and so true. And the first thing that Babe will do for Thomas, when we have convinced our keepers that it was their idea to force us together, is he will teach him to play a proper game of schach, écheques, shachmatyin, chess, scacchi... call it what you will, for you’ve a dismal idea of it at the moment, you young lummock. Checkmate with knobs on.’

‘I never really knew much more than the rules, I’m afraid.’

‘I shall set the pieces up again, and you will turn away. Droop all languid like a listless lily in Lent. You’re bored with me and you find me osmically offensive, which is to say you think I stink like the stinkiest stinkweed that was. But before you turn away, answer me something.’

‘What?’

‘How long is it that you believe you’ve been here?’

‘Well, I don’t know the year now, but it must be ... I don’t know. Three years? Four?’

‘It is ten, Thomas my friend. Ten years next month.’

‘What?’

‘Not so loud! And keep your eyes ever cast downwards. Today is, by the Grace of God, the eighteenth of June in the year nineteen ninety.’

‘But it can’t be anything like ... it can’t be that long! That would make me twenty-seven years old. That’s impossible!’

‘I hate to be the one to tell you, Thomas, but you look nearer thirty-seven or forty-seven. There’s grey mixed in your hair by the temples and those eyes of yours do not contain at all the look of youth. Ah now, he’s glaring over at us. Turn and look away.’

Martin came towards Ned, a meanly sarcastic smile on his face. ‘This was quick game. You no good for chess? You letting mad old man beat you?’

Ned shook his head.

‘I don’t like him,’ he said, gesturing towards the mumbling Babe. ‘He smells.’

‘You come and play and talk with Babe every day. Every day one hour longer. Is good for you each.’

‘But...

‘No but. No but. You make complaint and I have you two together all the time. Share room maybe? You like that? You like share your room with smelling old man?’

‘I won’t,’ said Ned, outraged. ‘I won't! You can’t make me!’

Over the next eight weeks Ned went to his room with small scraps of paper hidden about him. On them were written all the chess theory, attacks, defences, gambits, combinations and end game strategies that Babe knew. His course of instruction began with games played by Phillidor and Morphy and masterpieces of the romantic age, games that, like paintings, had titles: titles like The Evergreen, the Two Dukes and the Immortal. Ned was moved from these towards the age of Steinitz and the modern style, then to an understanding of a positional theory called the Hypermodern that made his head ache. Next came an induction into opening play and counter play whose language made Ned laugh. The Caro Kann and the Queen’s Indian, the Sicilian and the French Defences, the Gioco Piano and the Ruy Lopez. The Dragon variation, the Tartakower and the Nimzowitch. The Queen’s Gambit Declined and the Queen’s Gambit Accepted. The Marshall Attack. The Maroczy Bind. The Poisoned Pawn.

‘We shan’t be friends until we can play a game of chess together. You have it in you to play a decent game. Everyone has it in them to play a decent game. It’s nothing but memory and a refusal to think of yourself as a mental rabbit. If a soul can read and write, a soul can play a game of chess.’

There was so much Ned wanted to ask Babe, but any questions were waved aside over the board.

‘Chess lad. Pressing lidless eyes, we will play a game of chess. Your move, and watch your back rank.’

Dr Mallo had paid a visit to the sun-room during Ned’s first week there and ordered Babe away for a turn on the lawn.

‘I want to talk to my friend Thomas. I shall not move the pieces,’ the doctor had assured Babe, who shuffled away mumbling oaths into his beard.

‘So, how are you finding it, Thomas?’

‘It’s a little strange,’ said Ned uncertainly. ‘He’s a very peculiar man and I don’t really understand much he says. He can be very rude, but as long as I don’t talk too much he doesn’t seem to mind me.’

‘Have you talked to any other patients, I wonder?’

‘I try to sometimes,’ said Ned. ‘I don’t know which of them speak English. I upset that man over there yesterday by taking a chair that was next to him and he swore at me in English.’

‘Yes, that is Dr Michaels, a very unhappy man. You will never derive much sense from him I fear. Unstable, but not dangerous. I am pleased, Thomas, that you are able to sit out here. And Babe is not —' Dr Mallo looked down at the chessboard with what Ned could instinctively tell were uncomprehending eyes, ‘— Babe is not curious about you? He does not load your mind with questions?’

‘He doesn’t ask me anything,’ said Ned in a dis?appointed voice, ‘except when I’m going to make a move or why I bounce my knees up and down under the table.’

‘Ha! I ask, you understand, because it is so important that you are not encouraged into more fantasy concerning yourself. If anyone were to ask who you were and what is the nature of your illness ...

‘I don’t know what I would say, Doctor. I would tell them that my name is Thomas and that I am getting better. I prefer not to talk about myself.’

‘Quite so. He plays a good game of chess, Babe?’

Ned shrugged.

‘I think not, you have a checkmate in four moves if you look closely,’ said Dr Mallo rising and taking his leave with a brisk and satisfied nod of his head.

‘Mate in four moves, my arse and the arse of every man here!’ Babe had hissed under his breath when Ned reported the conversation to him. ‘The bullshit of the man, the fraud and fakery of him. If you don’t move up your h ?pawn you’ll be the one to be mated and in one move, never mind four.’

‘When can we talk of anything except chess, Babe?’

‘When you have beaten me.

‘But that’s never!’

‘Don’t you believe it. I’ve written out the Nimzo-Indian for you today. You’ll love it.’

As the weeks passed, Ned found himself becoming more and more obsessed by their games. He fell asleep each night with the diagonal tensions and energetic force-fields exerted by each piece pressing against his mind. Chess and the power of each man on the board dominated his inner life. He began to replay positions easily in his head, without having to picture the whole board. His questions, now solely confined to chess, began to please Babe.

‘Ah now. You’re confusing strategy with tactics there. That’s a thing that reminds me of my old lessons in military training. The strategy, you see, is the battle plan, the Big Idea. We will win the battle by taking that hill. There’s your strategy, to take the hill. How do we take the hill? Ah now, there’s your tactics. We might soften her up with artillery and follow through with an assault by armoured troops. We might bombard her from the air. Perhaps we will pretend to deploy around another target altogether and fool the enemy into thinking that we don’t care a damn about the hill. By night we send in our special forces, knives in their teeth and boot-black on their faces, to take our hill by stealth. There’s any amount of tactics and all at the service of the one strategic idea. You follow me?’

It was only later that Ned, all absorbed in the detail of chess, turned his mind to the remark ‘my old lessons in military training’. A man of Babe’s age had probably fought in the war. The Second World War. When Ned had first asked him if he was English, Babe had replied ‘Devil a bit I am,’ which Ned took to mean an emphatic negative. Babe’s voice however, in accent and delivery, was very English indeed, a rich fruity and deliciously old-fashioned sounding English that reminded Ned of old wireless broadcasts. The way he spoke, though, his choice of words and the strange spin he put on familiar phrases, that was somehow not very English at all. It had a stage Irish, or Hollywood pirate quality to it. One day he would discover more about him.

Meanwhile, two months into his training, Ned had an exciting week ahead of him. He had, for the first time, drawn a game. Babe had been the one to extend his hand across the board to make the offer which Ned, in his excitement and with the scent of victory in his nostrils, had turned down. Babe then forced an exchange of queens and rooks and the game petered out into the draw which it was always destined to be. But Ned had been playing black and to draw as black was always a positive result. The game of chess is so delicately balanced, Babe had explained, that the advantage of the first move is enough, in tournament play, to ensure that the majority of victories go to the player with the white pieces. Ned knew that this result with black was therefore a turning point.

The following day, Babe playing black had won easily and Ned, furious with himself, made assiduous plans that night to do something magnificent the next day.

He fell asleep with an idea in his mined that he should try the Winawer variation of the French Defence, which some instinct told him Babe did not enjoy playing. He awoke with a fully formed sense of how to win implanted in his mind. The plan involved not only the absolute chess of the game but psychology too and when Rolf, whose duty day it was, led him out to the sun-porch, he was already looking grouchy and underslept.

‘I shouldn’t have lost like that yesterday,’ he said, without offering any of his usual polite greetings. ‘You trapped me. It was pathetic.’

‘Dear me,’ said Babe straightening the white pieces in front of him. ‘Did we get out of bed the wrong side this morning?’

‘Let’s just play,’ said Ned moodily, inwardly praying that Babe’s king pawn would advance but staring instead at the c-pawn, as if hoping for an English opening or deferred Queen’s Indian.

With a shrug, Babe played e-4 and Ned instantly replied by pushing his own king’s pawn forward to meet it. Babe moved his knight out to f-3 and Ned moved a hand to his queen’s knight, as if resigned to an Italian or Spanish game. Then he dropped the hand back with a resentful tut and started to think. He took five minutes over his second move, the dull, seemingly ultra-defensive and amateurish d-6 that marks the French Defence. Babe continued to rattle out his pieces in the standard way and Ned haltingly replied. His heart beat faster and faster as each move repeated the pattern that he had planned the night before, developing into the very line of the Winawer that he had prepared. A moment came when Babe had to play with extreme accuracy to avoid a trap that Ned knew would cost him the loss of an active pawn. Babe stopped himself from playing the quick and obvious move and Ned, his head down, could sense in his field of peripheral vision, that Babe’s head had turned up to look at him. Ned did not shift, but continued to frown over the board, not revealing anything when Babe, avoiding the mistake, played the only correct move possible. Ned had not banked everything on a cheap tactical trap as he might have done two weeks earlier. In fact, he would have been disappointed if Babe had fallen for it. He knew that his position was good, and that was all that counted.

After an hour of fraught and completely silent play, Babe found himself a pawn down and having to marshal unconnected pieces to avoid all manner of tactical horrors. When a position is won, dozens of attacking com?binations, traps and spellbinding sacrifices present themselves to the player on the winning side. Ned was busy considering a spectacular sacrifice of his queen that he believed would force a checkmate in five or six moves, when Babe knocked over his king and gave a rich, low chuckle.

‘Outplayed from pillar to post, you devious son of a mountain whore.’

‘You resign?’

‘Of course I resign, you dastardly bog and vice versa. My position is so full of holes it’s a wonder the board doesn’t fall to the floor. You planned this, didn’t you, boy? From the first petulant pout of the lip to the last maddening stutter. Oh, you’re wicked. Wicked as whisky.'

Ned looked up anxiously. ‘But the chess, it wasn’t all tricks and psychology was it? I mean, the pure chess was good too.'

‘Lad, there is no such thing as pure chess. There’s good chess and there’s bad. Good chess takes in the breath of your opponent and the dip of his head as much as depth of his mind and the placing of his knights. Good chess cares about the way you move a piece just as much as the square you move it to. Did you know you played a Smyslov Screw just now? You did, you know. A real life Smyslov Screw.’

‘A what?’

‘Vasilly Smyslov, world champion from the Soviet Union. I saw him play, as it happens. A master of the endgame and as wily a fox as you’d care to be matched against. He had a way of setting a piece when he made a move and screwing it into the square, pressing down on it and slowly twisting it as though to fix it there for ever. Put the fear of God into his opponents, that simple little trick. You did the same just now when you moved your rook to the seventh. But more than that, you understand the greatest chess secret of all. The best move you can ever play in chess is not the best move. No, the best move you can ever play is the move your opponent least wants you to play. And that you did time after time. You knew that I hate the turgid tactical hell of the French, didn’t you? I never told you, but you sensed it. Oh my God boy, I could hug you I’m so proud.’

Ned saw that tears were falling down Babe’s face.

‘It’s all thanks to you,’ he said.

‘Fuff to that! What is it, nine ... no, eight and a half weeks since you first pushed a pawn in my direction. Look at you, look at what you can do with those sixteen pieces of cheap wood. Did you ever know your mind could think so deep and play so mean? Did you? Did you? Tell the Babe you’ve amazed yourself!’

‘Babe, I’ve amazed myself,’ said Ned. ‘I don’t know how I did it. I can’t believe it. I just can’t believe it. It’s you. You did it for me.

‘I did nothing. Nothing at all, but let you understand the power of your own mind. There isn’t a player in the world who could call you a patzer or a rabbit now. The great ones will beat you, for sure, but you’ll never disgrace yourself over a checkerboard, not if you live as long as me. This calls for a marvellous toast to be drunk.’

Ned laughed. ‘I’ll whistle for Rolf, shall I?’

‘You think I’m joking. Reach into your mind and draw out your favourite drink. What is it? Are you a whisky man like myself, or does your Harrovian favour the great deep wines of Bordeaux? Is it maybe the gossiping fizz of champagnes fit only for tarts and scoundrels that pleases you? Myself, I’m hankering for the salt oil of a Bunnahabhain, that mysterious Other of the Islay malts. I’ve its queer squat bottle in my hand now and I’m snagging my nails on the lead about its bung... hey now! What have I said to upset you?’

Tears were dropping from Ned’s chin onto the chessboard.

‘It’s nothing, nothing.., only you see I’ve never really had a chance to drink anything. My favourite drink is ... used to be... just a glass of cold milk.’

A memory of Oliver Delft opening the refrigerator door crashed into Ned’s mind and he gave a gulping sob.

‘Tss!’ Babe hushed him urgently. ‘Don’t let your distress be seen. I’m sorry Thomas, truly sorry. I had no idea in the world. My stupid tongue, it fancies itself to have a pleasing way with it. The women used to think me a seducer with words and sometimes I play up to the memory of that. It’s my one last vanity in this place of wined minds and in my vulgar haste I took you to a place you have forgotten to visit. But never mind that now. The day will come when you’ll be pleased to go back there.'





THE STARS’




‘No!’ said Ned forcefully. ‘I mustn’t. I absolutely mustn’t. There are things in my past that I still don’t understand properly and Dr Mallo says...’

‘Dr Mallo says! Take comfort in knowing that this is a man who is capable of saying, “It’s checkmate in four unless I’m much mistaken.” Dr Mallo, he don’t know shit from sugar and you can’t pretend it isn’t so. He has a soul of pus and the mind of a rotted turd. He is a failure and not a word he says can come near to you.

‘He’s a failure? Then what does that make us?’ choked Ned. 'What on earth does that make us?’

‘Well that’s something we must decide for ourselves, Thomas. Now, Rolf is walking by, heave a giant sneeze into your handkerchief as if you’d caught a mote of dust in the sunlight.’

The last words that Ned said to Babe that afternoon were, ‘Will you teach me, Babe? Teach me everything you know. Just as you did with chess. Teach me all the science and poetry and philosophy you can. Teach me history and geography. Teach me music and art and mathematics. Will you? You know so much and I know so little. I was supposed to have gone to Oxford, but...’

‘Well, you were saved that at least,’ Babe had replied, ‘so there’s hope yet. Yes, I’ll teach you, Thomas. We shall tread the wide path of philosophy as we trod the narrow path of chess and who knows what we shall discover about ourselves as we go along the way?’

*

Babe, who was allowed to spend as much time as he liked in the sun-room or out on the lawn, watched Ned being led back through the glazed partition and smiled to himself.

A wickedly enchanting game of chess the lad played there.

Babe was not quite possessed of a God complex, but the mind he had kept so assiduously alive was yearning to do something, to mould and to create. He had always known that he was born to teach: the life of action and ideals had done nothing for him but lead him to this place. In the outside world he had denied his real vocation and was being offered now a chance to redeem himself in one last act of dedication. Dedication this time not to the poor, the dispossessed, the conquered and the subjugated masses, but dedication to the life of the mind and the power of human will.

Before Ned had walked into the sun-room two months earlier Babe had been almost ready to give up his tenacious grip on the world, almost ready to quit the inner fortress he had so carefully constructed and so faithfully inhabited all those years. Ned was not to know it, but the games of chess they had played together had been Babe’s salvation. Whatever they might have done for Ned, they had done more for Babe.

Babe’s brain was a freak of God’s and God deserved better than to have that freak die with the old man that housed it. His prodigious and flawlessly complete memory was the gift that had first marked him out. A memory without energy, will and purpose is of no value however, and those qualities Babe had too and in terrifying superabundance. Without them, his brain, no matter what its speed and power, could never have survived the appalling regime of drugs, isolation and electric convulsions to which it had been subjected for so many years.

Babe’s brain and memory were, after all, a simple matter of genetic fortune and he took no pride in them whatsoever: he had come to discover that it was his will and his will alone that marked him out from common men and will — unlike cerebral proficiency — could be taught, passed on and made to live for ever.

With the exception of the Universal British Cyclopaedia (Ed. F. S. Dorrington) the only books to which the staff allowed Ned access were in Swedish, German and Danish. While Dorrington’s work on everything from Aahhotep to Zwingler seemed perfectly acceptable to Ned, Babe had other ideas. He had taken the book from Ned, opened a page at random and snorted with contempt.

‘Look at that,’ he said, stabbing down an angry finger. ‘Will you just look at the two Grays?’

Ned peered over Babe’s shoulder and saw that there were two entries under the name Gray, the first for a George Gray which began ‘Professional champion player of Queensland who, at only 17 years of age created a sensation in the billiard world with his exceptional hazard play...’ and a second shorter entry for a Thomas Gray, ‘English poet buried in Stoke Poges.’

‘And here’s this,’ Babe continued, flipping back a page, “‘Grappa, Mountain of Italy, scene of fierce fighting between the Italians and the Austro-Germans in the Great War.” Not a mention of that heavenly and disgusting drink that makes the place immortal! No, no, no, this won’t do. I’m taking it off your hands. We start you on Swedish and German books right away.’

‘But, Babe, I can’t read Swedish or German...

‘Can you name me a great book that you know well? We’ll see if they have it in either language.’

Ned shuffled uncomfortably. ‘A great book?’

‘A novel, tell me at least that you’ve read a novel before now.

‘We did The Mayor of Casterbridge at school. And Lord of the Flies.’

‘Of course you did, you poor lamb. Treasure Island, did you ever read that? I know for a fact they have it here in German.’

‘Oh yes!’ said Ned enthusiastically. ‘I must have read it at least six times.’

‘Only six times? And what was wrong with it? The book’s a masterpiece.’

‘But, how will I understand a word of it? The only German I know is Sprechen Sie Englisch and Achtung, Schweinhund.’

‘We shall read it together. You’ll amaze yourself.’

The weeks passed and, with painful slowness at first, they passed through the pages of Treasure Island. After A Christmas Carol, The Scarlet Letter and The Count of Monte Cristo, Ned found himself able to absorb at a faster rate and shape more sentences of his own. After a while he began reading by himself, getting through German books in his room faster than he had read in his own language when a boy. Swedish followed, then Latin, French, Spanish and Italian.

‘Fluency equals necessity times confidence over time,’ Babe liked to say. ‘If a five-year-old can speak a language, it cannot be beyond a fifty-year-old.’

‘But a five-year-old can run around for hours, tumbling and falling over without getting tired,’ Ned might often complain, ‘it doesn’t follow that a fifty-year-old can do the same.

‘Bolshy talk. I’ll have none of it.’

Sometimes, in the summer months, Babe and Ned walked on the lawn together, speaking low in Swedish (it was a game they enjoyed, not letting any of the staff know that Ned had learnt the language of the place and could now understand the staff when they spoke in front of him) and Babe would encourage Ned to talk of his past.

‘Charlie Maddstone. You don’t say? Never served under him myself, but I had friends who did. And he turned to politics? Now that was a mistake for a man like that. He was born a hundred years too late that one.

The relief for Ned to be able to talk about his life was enormous and he felt himself thriving. His appetite for knowledge grew and it was not long before he and Babe were talking about ideas that Ned had never considered in all his life.

‘We’re conquering time, do you see, Ned?’ Babe called him by his real name now, when they were beyond the ears of the staff. ‘What do all people in the real world, the world outside this wicked island, regard as the most precious commodity known to them? Time. Time, the old enemy, they call it. What do you hear again and again? “If only I had more time.” “Had we but world enough and time.” “There’s never enough time. I never had the time to learn music, to enjoy life, to find out the names of the stars in the sky, the plants of the earth, the birds of the air. I never had time to teach myself Italian.” “There’s no time to think.” “How can I possibly find the time to do that?” “I never found the time to tell her how much I loved her.”

‘And all we have, you and I, is that very thing, time, and if we look on this as the most magnificent gift afforded to mankind, then we can see that in this place we are one with Augustine in his cell and Montaigne in his tower. We are the chosen, the privileged. We have what the richest man on earth most covets and can never buy. We have what Henri Bergson saw as God’s chief instrument of torture and madness. Time. Oceans of time in which to be and to become.’

There were days when Ned, remembering this speech, endorsed it and praised Fate for his captivity and the freedom over time it gave him. At other moments, the more he knew, the more he balked and fretted.

‘Do you understand why you are here, Babe?’ he asked once.

‘Pooh, Ned, it’s so simple. I am here because I am mad. We are all here because we are mad. Was that not explained to you when you arrived?’

‘No, seriously. You’re not mad and I know that I am not, although that is entirely thanks to you. Don’t you trust me enough yet to tell me about yourself? You’ve never even told me your real name.’

They had been walking around the lawn and Babe stopped now and tugged at his beard. ‘I sprang from an impoverished branch of the grand and ancient Scottish family of Fraser and was christened Simon. As the youngest of six the nickname of Babe has always stayed with me. I was hired fresh from university because of this memory of mine,’ he said, staring out over the lawn and towards the bald and distant hills. ‘Things stick in the deep brain-pan with which God saw fit to curse me. In those days they stuck even faster and firmer. Intelligence and purpose had nothing to do with it. I remembered the time of every Derby winner as well as I remembered the postulates of Spinoza or the categorical imperatives of Kant. There was a cold war on and a man like me was a useful asset. But I had a conscience, Ned and the day came when I went to see a writer friend of mine. I told him I wanted to collaborate on a book. A great book, to be published in America, for they would never have let it see the light of day in Britain. A book that would blow the whistle on every dirty trick, every hypocritical evasion and every filthy lie that ever came out of the west in its squalid battle for supremacy over its perceived enemy. I’m not a traitor, Ned, nor never would be. I loved England. I loved it too well to let it sink lower than the level of a dung-beetle in its pursuit of lost grandeur. Well, it turned out that the writer friend was no friend at all and the long and the short of it is that I found myself here. This is a place they use if it suits them. When someone is a threat, you understand. The Soviets have their psychiatric prisons and so, as you have found, do we. Ours are a better kept secret, that is the only difference that I have ever been able to make out.’

Ned thought for a while. ‘I suppose I had imagined something like that,’ he said at length. ‘That’s why I wanted to hear it from you. If you are here for that reason then it follows that I must be here for that reason too. Only, you know why you are here and I do not. Some — I don’t know — some conspiracy brought me here and I need to understand what it was.’

‘We are merely the stars’ tennis-balls, Ned, struck and banded which way please them.’

‘You don’t believe that. You believe in will. You told me so.

‘Like anyone with a sliver of honesty in them I believe what I find I believe when I wake up each morning. Sometimes I can only think we are determined by the writing in our genes, sometimes it seems to me that we are made or unmade by our upbringings. On better days, it is true that I hope with some conviction that we and we alone make ourselves everything that we are.

‘Nature, Nurture or Nietzsche in fact.’

‘Ha!’ Babe clapped Ned in the back. ‘It’s coming on, the creature is coming on,’ he boomed to the wide uncomprehending lawn. ‘Listen,’ he said, tucking his arm in Ned’s, ‘if you want to understand your own situation, can you not apply some of the logic it has cost me so much brain blood to teach you? Take out Occam’s Razor and cut away the irrelevant and the obfuscatory. Set down only what you know. Did I never tell you about Zeno?’

‘His paradox of how Achilles could never reach the winning line? Yes, you told me.’

‘Ah, but he had another lesson to teach us. I will show you.

Babe led Ned towards a tall pine that leaned away from the slope and towards the high fence at the bottom of the lawn.

‘We shall sit under the tree. Great thinkers have always sat under trees. It is an academic thing to do. The word itself derives from the Academia, the grove where Plato taught his pupils. Even the French lycée is named after the Lyceum garden where Aristotle held his classes. Enlightenment came to Buddha and Newton under trees they say, and it shall come to Ned Maddstone there too. Now, watch. I pick up a fir cone, an immobile strobile, and I put it in front of you and ask this question. Is it a heap?’

‘I’m sorry?’

‘Is that a heap?’

‘No, of course not.’

Babe added another. ‘How about that, do we have a heap now? Of course not, we have nothing more than two fir cones. Incidentally did it ever strike you as suspicious that fir cone is an anagram of conifer? More dirty work from God, you might think. Look at the arrangement too. A band of three, then five, then eight, then thirteen and so on. A Fibonacci series. Beyond coincidence, surely? Mr God giving himself away again. But that is a side issue. Here we have two cones. All right then, I add another. Is it now a heap?’

‘No.’

‘I’ll add another.’

Ned leant back against the soft warm bark of the pine tree and watched as Babe scrabbled about fetching fir cones, each time adding another.

‘Yes,’ he said at last, as much out of pity for Babe as because he thought so, ‘I’d say that is definitely a heap.’

‘We have a heap!’ Babe clapped his hands. ‘A heap of fir cones! Seventeen of the darlings. So Ned Maddstone is telling the world that seventeen is officially a heap?’

‘Well...’

‘Seventeen fir cones constitute a heap, but sixteen do not?’

‘No, I’m not saying that exactly...’

‘There we have the problem. The world is full of heaps like this, Ned. This is good, this is not good. This is bad luck, but this is a towering injustice. This is mass murder and this genocide. This is child-killing, this abortion. This is lawful intercourse, this statutory rape. There is nothing but a single fir cone’s difference between them, sometimes just the one lonely only little cone telling us that it represents the difference between heaven and hell.’

‘I don’t quite see the connection...'

‘You yourself, Ned, you say a conspiracy brought you here. That is like saying a heap brought you here. Who is a conspiracy? Why? How many exactly? For what purpose? Don’t tell me it was a heap, just a heap, no more no less. Tell me it was seventeen, or four, or five hundred. See the thing as it is in all its quiddity, all its whatness, all its particularity and deep nature. Otherwise you will never understand the blindest thing about what happened to you, not if you were here for a thousand years and spoke a thousand languages.'

It was deep midwinter and the whole island glowed crystalline white under its eternal shroud of winter dark?ness. The chairs had been moved from the sun room into a salon deeper inside the building. In one of the arches Babe and Ned sat playing backgammon over a formica table.

The stone arches that ran along the side of the salon were one of the few detectable remnants of the original monastery around which the hospital had been built and its Romanesque structure of blank arcading had once allowed for a rare practical lesson in architectural elements. Only the sun and clouds by day, the stars at night and the rounded hills visible through the windows in summer had offered like chances for Ned to use more than his mind’s eye when taking instruction.

The backgammon they played was of an unusual kind. Since the hospital did not have a set, they played using five paper dice and nothing else. The board and thirty men existed only in their minds. The eccentricity of their games amused the staff. Two of the patients had grown upset however and attempted to pull the imaginary board from the table and trample it — presumably, Ned had suggested, because it played hell with their own sense of the real and the invisible. Their pride, as lunatics, in being able to see what others could not was inflamed when they could not see what others apparently could. By reason of the strong effect their playing had on others, Ned and Babe were allowed to sit in that vaulted arch, away from the central area of tables where the others sat.

It was easy for Ned and Babe to see the pieces laid out in front of them. They played for a hundred pounds a point and at this time Babe owed Ned forty-two million pounds. They had no need for concentration to remember their positions and were able to carry on conversations of some complexity in languages of their choosing, without ever challenging the other’s sense of where the pieces were, or quibbling over how many men were left to be borne off in the ending. Sometimes, as on this evening, Ned flicked a- flat stone around the fingers of one hand. Babe had taught him coin and card magic and he liked to keep in practice, French dropping, palming, stealing and manipu?lating as he talked.

For the last week, Ned had been able to do a little teaching of his own on the subject of cricket, a game of which Babe was ignorant.

Babe was talking now of the writings of C. L. R. James, a historian and social commentator he greatly admired.

‘It’s a pity I shall never read him again, Thomas,’ he said with a sigh. ‘I always skipped those passages where he waxed lyrical about cricket. He connected it to West Indian life, to colonialism, Shakespeare, Hegel and every other bebuggered thing. I interpreted it as sentimental hogwash, such was the puritanical ignorance of my youth.’

‘I was a fine player, you know,’ Ned said. ‘I think I might have played for Oxford and maybe even for a county if things had turned out differently. God, it sounds absurd to talk about cricket in Italian. Can’t we switch?’

‘Certainly,’ said Babe in Dutch. ‘This is much more appropriate, don’t you think? They do play a little in Holland.’

‘I suppose so. My father’s hero was Prince Ranjitsinji. I told you about him, didn’t I? From the golden age of cricket. Men said that watching his leg-glide was like seeing the Taj Mahal by moonlight.’

‘I did see the Taj Mahal by moonlight once,’ said Babe. ‘Very disappointing it was too, the...

‘I know,’ said Ned, with a hint of impatience, ‘you told me. I couldn’t sleep last night, my father visited me in my dreams again.’

‘Your mind always harks on the past in the middle of these long winters,’ said Babe, accepting a double from Ned and placing the cube close by him. ’The bones in your shoulders ache and you fret. The spring is not so far away. You’ll be more cheerful then.’ Babe softly whistled a tune under his breath.

‘Die Walküre,’ Ned said, absently. ‘Act One, Scene Three. “Siehe, der Lenz lacht in den Saal”... look, spring smiles into the room.

‘Ten out of ten. And this?’ Babe whistled again.

‘Never mind all that,’ Ned reverted to English. ‘I’m not in the mood for testing tonight. I still want to know, you see. I still need to know.’

‘What is there that you do not know?’

‘You must be aware by now, Babe, that I am not a fool.

This is a private lunatic asylum, or as Mallo prefers to call it “élite international clinic”. Nobody comes here for free.

Someone has paid for you to be here and for me to be here.

And they have gone on paying.’

‘The art of good intelligence work is nothing to do with spying, Ned. The art is to manipulate the civil servants and ministers who operate the Secret Fund. The world follows money with a keener nose than it follows anything. If you can hide your bank accounts and your standing orders, if you can siphon and launder and divert streams of government money, then, and only then, can you truly call yourself a spy.’

‘All right. So there is no great mystery about the how. But in my case there is still the why. That is what makes no sense. When I first arrived I thought I’d been kidnapped. But kidnappers don’t keep shelling out money for their captives. So after a few years I began to believe what Mallo told me, that I was a fantasist whose real life was buried so deep that no memory of it remained. I know that isn’t true and I suppose I always did. I know that I was taken here quite deliberately. But by whom and why? That is what still eludes me. No one can have thought for a moment that I was an IRA collaborator, and if they had they certainly would not bring me here, to the same place they bring people like you.’

‘As you have seen, Ned, the genuinely insane come here too. You and I are the only inmates to flatter ourselves that we are political prisoners. You keep denying the possibility, but have you not stopped to think that perhaps those who put us in this place knew what they were doing? Perhaps I was admitted here because I truly am mad? Quite terribly mad.’

‘Yes,’ Ned admitted with a smile, ‘naturally I’ve considered that. And of course you are mad, if by a madman we mean one who possesses a mind that questions and rejects every civilised norm. And, whatever your condition on admittance, you have certainly become mad. The solipsistic hoarding of your own self and the hubristic munification of your will against the potent authority of the institution, these are textbook psychopathologies. Psychopathologies that privilege the artist, the revolutionary and the lover quite as much as the lunatic, however. You may acquit yourself of insanity on that account.’

‘Dear God, Thomas, acquit me too that I ever taught you to speak like that.'

‘I choose this style of discourse to provoke you, and well you know it. I return to the same problem again and again. I have somehow got on the wrong side of the British secret service, or whatever one chooses to call it. Can you not at least agree with me on that?’

Babe bowed his head in assent.

‘You remember that time you sat under the picea abies and went through Zeno’s paradox of the heap?’

‘I do.’

‘The idea being to encourage me to look at facts clearly? To separate the concrete from the abstract, the actual from the perceived?’

‘I don’t believe I put it quite like that, but yes, I do remember.’

‘Well, every night I go over what I am sure are the five salient points in my history and try to be sure that I have seen them clearly. They yield nothing.’

‘Tell me what you mean by the salient points.’

‘They are obvious. One, I unwittingly agreed to deliver a letter that was given me by an IRA courier. Two, I was arrested for the possession of drugs which had been planted on me. Three, because that letter was also still on my person, I was removed from a police station and taken to what I may assume was a British intelligence safe house where I was interrogated. Four, at the end of the interrogation I was told that I would be taken home. Five, I was not taken home, I was cruelly beaten and transported here, where I have stayed ever since. I don’t believe I’m wrong in identifying those as the important facts, surely?’

‘If you say so.

‘What do you mean “if I say so”? I’ve beaten my head against the wall of those facts for years and years.’

‘Which might suggest,’ said Babe gently, ‘that they are of no use to you. Perhaps you have still not been approaching matters in the right way. The right way would not endlessly lead to an immovable wall of facts, it would disclose a pattern of events. A pattern that could be unlocked. By labelling your facts one, two, three and so on, you are implying a causal sequential relation between them that may obscure that pattern.'

‘But there is no pattern! That’s what I’m saying.’

‘Don’t ask yourself what happened to you. Ask yourself what happened to you.

‘And what on earth is that supposed to mean?’

‘Did you have enemies, for example? You never talk about that possibility.’

‘I never had an enemy in the world!’ said Ned with some heat. ‘I was the most popular boy in the school. I was about to be made Captain of School. I was captain of the cricket team. I was in love. I was ready to go to Oxford. How could anybody hate me?’

Babe laughed.

‘And what’s so funny?’

‘I’m sorry. Let me try and explain. You have just summarised the situation of a person who might have good cause to be happy, but how does it answer my question? It is a description of someone for whom the classic response “Don’t you just hate him?” was invented.’

‘I don’t follow.’

‘Don’t tell me you haven’t heard that kind of cliché banter before? “What, he’s good at sport and work? And he’s good-looking? Don’t tell me he’s nice as well, or I’ll really hate him.” That’s how real people in the real world talk, Ned and you must know it.

‘But I was nice...

‘Nice is a heap word. You pile up enough “nice” actions and you think that makes you a whole heap of nice? What were you really? What did you do? It is your actions that define you, not your qualities.’

‘I did nothing.’

‘Your inactions then.’

‘You’re saying some people hated me?’

‘Not hated necessarily. It might be worth separating a number of these salient facts of yours. Let’s forget the big one, your arrival here and concentrate on the initiating fact. Let us suppose the dope was planted on you to disgrace you. Now who might benefit from that?’

‘No one. How could anybody benefit from such a stupid thing? It would just upset those who loved me that’s all.’

‘Ah, well. Maybe that was the very benefit sought. But perhaps too there was a more tangible advantage for someone. Captain of School, captain of cricket and in love with a beautiful girl. There are plenty of hot youths who might covet any one or all three of those things to distraction. Who would become Captain of School, for example, if you were expelled for the possession of drugs?’

‘How can I know that?’

‘You must have some idea.’

‘Well, Ashley Barson— Garland probably.’

‘Ashley Barson-Garland. Tell me about him. Everything you can think of. Talk in numbers, not in heaps.’

So Ned told Babe all about Ashley, concluding his description with ‘... but he liked me, I’m sure of it…’ which sounded a little lame, even to his own ears.

‘You don’t think he suspected that you had looked through those five private pages of his innermost thoughts?’

‘I was incredibly careful not to show it. No, he couldn’t possibly have known.'

‘Oh Ned. Poor Ned. Think back on yourself. Think back on the pretty, smiling lad you were. How much did you know then? How well were you able to hide anything? What guile did you possess? Don’t you see that a sophisticated, prickly, bitter and self-aware creature like this self-styled Barson-Garland could have read you more easily than you read his diary? Snobs see social slights wherever they go and frauds can read exposure in every glance. Even if he did not know, can you not believe that he. might have suspected?’

Ned chewed his bottom lip in irritation. ‘All right, but even if he did, why would he hate me?’

‘Use your imagination.’

‘I thought you told me to examine everything dispassionately. If I use imagination I can dream up anything, what help is that?’

‘Don’t confuse imagination with fantasy. Imagination is the ability to project yourself into the mind of others. It is the most hard-headed and clear-eyed faculty we have. If you use your imagination, you can see that from Ashley’s point of view you were every single thing that he was not. My own instinct, I must tell you, is that he was also in love with you but unable to see it.’

‘Oh for God’s sake!’

‘Think back what you read. Masturbating with all that fury into the boater he kept. I won’t labour the point, it’s just a theory.’

‘That’s all any of this is, just theory.’

‘Then why does it upset you so much?’

‘It doesn’t upset me ...' Ned’s knee began to bounce up and down, a thing that had not happened for a long time. He stopped himself. ‘All right, perhaps it does. Because it’s so useless. Because it doesn’t get us anywhere.’

‘It upsets you because it is not useless, because it might get us closer to the truth. The truth that others may not have seen you as you believed they did. Maybe they saw you as arrogant, thoughtless, obnoxious and vain, as so self-assured that even your politeness and charm were like daggers in their poor fucked up adolescent hearts. But you re a grown man now, and you should be able to see all that without hurting yourself.’

‘Well even so,’ said Ned irritably, ‘you can’t tell me that Ashley Barson-Garland would go so far as getting hold of drugs deliberately to have me thrown out of school. He didn’t know the first thing about... Cade!’ Ned brought his fist down on the table, crushing the paper doubling cube. ‘Oh Jesus, Rufus Cade.’

‘Never mind that,’ said Babe, as Ned tried to reassemble the cube. ‘Rufus Cade. That’s not a name you’ve mentioned before.’

‘He wasn’t anyone. I did drop him from the First Eleven ... but that’s ridiculous. No one, I mean no one could be so vindictive and petty-minded as to ... he smoked cannabis though, I do know that. All the time.’

‘Well now, suddenly we have two boys with motives, however trivial. And one of them even has access to what we might call the murder weapon.

‘Do you know,’ said Ned, only half-listening. ‘I think deep down I always had a feeling that Rufus didn’t really like me. I can’t quite explain it. There was something in the way his eyes slid away from mine when we talked. He was never exactly rude, but I do remember the time I had to skipper the Orphana back to Oban, after Paddy died. Rufus was on board then and he was horrid to me. I think he resented my taking command. It really puzzled and upset me. Maybe I was arrogant. But you’re asking me to believe that he and Ashley were like insane Iago figures plotting to bring Othello down. I wasn’t Othello for God’s sake, I was just a schoolboy.’

‘What was Othello’s crime? He was big, handsome and successful. And he had Desdemona.’

‘But Rufus had never even set eyes on Portia. Ashley met her the same day that I did, but Ashley ... I mean, there were always rumours that he might be, you know, queer ... not that that means I agree with you when you said that he might be in love with me,’ Ned added quickly. ‘After all, he can’t have loved me and hated me at the same time.’

‘Don’t tell me you’ve forgotten all that Catullus I once tried to ram into your head,’ said Babe sorrowfully.

‘Odi et amo, yes I know. And if you’re trying to tell me that Portia hated me too then I’ll just walk away and never talk to you again. I know that isn’t true. But if...’ Ned’s voice trailed away and he stared down at the table, thinking furiously.

‘An idea taking shape, is it?’ Babe asked after a long pause. ‘If there were an art to find the mind’s construction in the face, then I would say you were thinking imponderable thoughts and that light was beginning to break.’

‘Gordon. Gordon Fendeman.’ Ned drew the name out slowly. ‘Portia’s cousin. If I think very hard ... the way they were when I met them at the airport. They’d been on holiday together and it irritated me the way he stood next to her. I wasn’t jealous exactly, but I remember that I didn’t like it. It made me uncomfortable. And Portia told me she had never read my last postcard to her because Gordon had ruined it. Accidentally, she said, but maybe not.’

Babe listened carefully to everything Ned had to say about Gordon.

‘Let’s see if I’ve got this clear,’ he said. ‘Ashley and Gordon went off together to look at the House of Commons the day you got back from Scotland and Portia and Gordon got back from Italy?’

‘That’s right, I remember thinking that it would be nice for Gordon to see the Mother of Parliaments.’

‘Dear me, I hope you didn’t actually say that?’ Babe smothered a smile.

‘And just what exactly would be wrong with that?’

‘Just a tiny bit pompous perhaps?’

‘Well, perhaps...’ Ned smiled too. ‘Anyway, the point is that later, when Portia and I were still.., when we were still upstairs making love, they came back.’ Ned struck the table again. ‘God, that must be it! That must be it!’

‘Gordon and Ashley came back?’

‘Yes, but with Rufus. Don’t you see? Ashley must always have been going to meet up with him in a pub somewhere. He and Rufus were thick as thieves. Rufus came down to London from Scotland on the same train as me. Ashley took Gordon off to meet Rufus in a pub and they all came back while Portia and I were still upstairs.

‘What did they say?’

‘It was only for a moment. Ashley said ... what did he say? Said there was something he had to fetch. He called up to me. “You young people enjoy yourselves...“ those were his exact words. And Babe, listen to this! My jacket was hanging on the banister in the hallway downstairs. Jesus, they must have sat there in the pub and planned it all. They even knew where I was going! They knew I was going to Knightsbridge with Portia to...’

‘Calm down, Ned. Calm down.’

‘Can’t you just picture them sitting there, getting tanked up around a pub table and moaning about Ned bloody Maddstone and how they’d like to see him come crashing down? That’s when they decided to ruin my life. All they had to do was make an anonymous phone call to the police. And they laughed as they planted the stuff in my jacket. “You young people enjoy yourselves!” Those are the words that Ashley called up and I heard Rufus and Gordon smothering their giggles. I remember feeling touched and proud. I thought my friends were giggling like naughty schoolboys at the thought of me and Portia upstairs and I was proud. But they were laughing because they knew I was about to be destroyed. And I’ll tell you something else! They watched it all happen!’ Both Ned’s legs were jogging up and down uncontrollably as revelation after revelation poured into his head. ‘I distinctly remember laughter from the doorway opposite as the police pushed me into their car. They destroyed me and they laughed.’

Ned’s face was white and spittle creamed at the corners of his mouth as it did on the lips of some of the real lunatics they saw every day. Babe leaned forward to touch his arm. ‘It’s all right, my friend. It’s all right. Take it slowly. You may have landed on the truth here

‘Of course I have! That’s it! How in hell could I not have seen it before?’

‘You know how you didn’t see it before. I told you. You didn’t see it before, because you were not looking clearly. Look clearly now. Four schoolboys, a stupid prank played on one them, that is what you are talking about. Nasty perhaps, certainly nasty, but don’t allow yourself —‘

‘They laughed, Babe! They laughed at me.’

Martin’s voice intruded on them. ‘What exactly is going on here? You two having some kind of lover’s quarrel?’

Ned almost betrayed his understanding of Swedish by leaping in with an angry retort, but Babe beat him to it.

‘Not a quarrel, Martin... can’t remember the numbers.

Can’t remember the numbers,’ he said in a dazed mumble, staring down at the invisible backgammon board.

‘You two,’ said Martin in English, ‘both crazy. Everyone here crazy,’ he spread his arms to include the room, ‘but you two most crazy of all. Is time now you go to rooms. Tomorrow shall be an inspection. Shave in the morning, be behaving well.’

Ned did not sleep that night. Around in his head revolved three laughing faces. Fendeman, Garland and Cade. The names repeated in his mind like the rhythm of a train or the thunder of hooves on a racetrack.

Fendeman, Garland and Cade. Fendeman, Garland and Cade. Fendeman, Garland and Cade. Fendeman, Garland and Cade.

Babe also lay awake that night, and for many subsequent nights. He had detected a change in Ned that worried him.

‘I don’t like to see you thrashing your engine like this,’ he would say. ‘There is nowhere to take it. It can only burn you up.

Ned seemed to take no notice and retreated more and more into the past where he relived his final days in the world over and over, hearing again each syllable that had been spoken to him by Fendeman, Garland and Cade, seeing once more in his mind’s eye every glance and gesture they made. He had built up a picture of himself through their eyes.

He saw from Rufus Cade’s point of view an image of Ned the arrogant, Ned the cocky, Ned the careless and vain. Every sweet smile, every polite mumbled apology seemed to him now an obvious cause of resentment.

Ned understood how to Ashley he must have repre?sented everything assured, everything attractive, every?thing unattainably privileged, perfect and graceful. Even the act of securing him summer employment as his father’s assistant could appear patronising and offensive.

Gordon too, arriving in a foreign land, would naturally look upon Ned Maddstone as the living image of all that was remote, English, gentile and alien. To see his cousin Portia ignore him in her obsession with a boy so opposite to himself could certainly drive Gordon to hatred.

Everything Ned had and was he could now interpret as repugnant, ugly, oppressive and obscene. Everything in and of him — the V-neck cricket sweaters, the flopping fringe of hair, the rueful smiles and pretty eyes, the lazy athleticism, the delicate skin and peachy blush, the voice, accent, manner and gait — all of Ned Maddstone stood as a monument that those of spirit would cry out to despoil.

Yet how dared they? How dared they not see that Ned had been unaware of all this? How dared they not understand that he was blamelessly unimaginative, gentle and innocent? Whatever arrogance he may have displayed, Ned would never in those days have assumed that his feelings had primacy over those of others. That they could be so confident in their interpretation of him was an arrogance way beyond anything he had been capable of. They hid their rage. They pretended to like him. They coldly planned to disgrace him in the eyes of his father and his lover, as if he had no emotional life, no point of view and no right to happiness of his own. That they could treat him as a symbol without life or capacity for pain marked them down as evil beyond imagining. There did not exist the faintest possibility that Ned could ever forgive them.

Fendeman, Garland and Cade. Fendeman, Garland and Cade.

‘I have been trying to apply the same thinking to what happened after my arrest,’ he said to Babe one morning, while Babe sketched a circuit diagram.

‘Let’s just concentrate on what we’re doing, shall we? Have you an idea what it is yet?’

‘It’s a hi-fl amplifier circuit.’

Babe shook his head. ‘You’re not trying. Count the capacitors.’

‘An electronic calculator. A central heating thermostat. Controls for an automatic milking parlour. Who cares? Babe, we’ve got this far, we’ve got to go further. I’m right about everything that happened up to my arrival at the police station, I know it. Those three planned my arrest. But they knew nothing about the letter. I need to understand what happened next.’

Babe sighed and put down his pen. ‘A burglar alarm, and such an elegant one too,’ he said, folding the diagram in half. ‘Here, you can study it later. I shall be asking you questions about it another time.’

Ned took it impatiently. ‘Sure,’ he said. ‘Another time.

‘Tell me once more,’ said Babe. ‘You were taken by a man called Oliver Delft to a house in the country. You sat in the kitchen and explained to him how you came by the envelope and its incriminating code words. You are there again now. Picture it. Feel yourself there, Delft in front of you with a glass of wine, you at the table with your carton of milk.’

Ned closed his eyes and tried to recall the dialogue.

‘… you’ll be home before the News at Ten ... Don’t mind a tape-recorder do you? Tell me more about your friend Leclare ... He wasn’t my friend, he was just the school’s sailing instructor ... We went on lots of school trips ... More questions. Endless questions.

‘Can you remember them all?’

‘He asked me everything. Everything about the sailing trip. How long did we stay at the Giant’s Causeway...’ Ned screwed his eyes tighter. ‘He was relaxed, bored almost. You’re doing well, Ned, very well. Not too far to go now.., was it a moonless night?... That’s good, Ned. Excellent, excellent. And the envelope came from where? ... Well, a shop I suppose, a stationer’s ... No, no, he produced it from where? His pocket? A safe? What? ... Oh, from a small bag on the chart table ... Any maker’s name? Adidas, Fila, that sort of thing? ... Good, good. Nearly there, old son. Your chum Rufus Cade still out of earshot, was he? I see. Nothing written on the envelope was there? ... On and on came the questions.

‘And he’s standing over you,’ Babe’s voice seemed to come from far away. ‘He’s questioning you, the tape is running and you say he looks almost bored?’

‘He had a sudden twinge of cramp and that woke him up a bit,’ said Ned.

‘Cramp?’ said Babe, frowning. ‘What do you mean cramp?’

‘Well, he leapt out of his seat and started walking up and down. I asked him if he was all right and he said it was just a touch of cramp. Then he went out of the room for a moment and came back with a bag of clothes...’

Babe leaned forward. ‘What had you said?’ he asked. ‘What had you said just before he got cramp? What exactly were your words?’

‘He had been asking me about the envelope, who Paddy wanted me to deliver it to, all the details...’

‘But what exactly had you said?’

‘Well, I told him what Paddy had asked me to do — I told him the envelope was to be delivered to a Mr Blackrow, Philip R. Blackrow in... what was the name of the street? It was a square, Heron Square, W1. Number Thirteen, I’m pretty sure —‘ Ned broke off. Babe was staring across the table at him with a look of horror on his face. ‘What? Babe, what on earth is the matter?’

Babe shook his head and made a noise that sounded like something between a groan and a laugh.

‘Are you all right? What is it?’

‘Oh, Ned, Ned, Ned.’ Babe rocked backwards and forwards in his chair. ‘Why did you never tell me that part of it before? You only told me Blackrow. But Paddy didn’t say Philip Blackrow, that isn’t the name he gave you.

‘Yes it was. I was the one there, for God’s sake, not you! The name was Philip R. Blackrow, 13 Heron Square. I heard it clear as anything.’

Babe had started to shake with laughter. ‘Philip R.

Blackrow! Oh, you poor young donkey, is that what you heard? Don’t you see? It wasn’t Philip R. anything, it was

Philippa. Philippa Blackrow. That was the name. Philippa Blackrow.’

‘Philippa? But how could you be so sure of that?’ Ned stared at Babe in bewilderment. ‘I mean it’s possible, I suppose but — are you saying you know her?’

‘I should have joined the dots earlier,’ said Babe. ‘You mentioned the name Blackrow and I never made the connection. What a fool you are, Babe.’

‘What connection? Babe, if you know something, then tell me.’

‘Delft and Blackrow, I can’t believe I’ve been so slow. But there again, who but I would have remembered those names from just one glance at a file over thirty years ago? Oh, you’re an unlucky man, Ned Maddstone, a most unlucky man.’

‘Tell me, Babe. Tell me everything.’

‘Did you ever hear of Jack Custance?’

Ned shook his head.

‘Shot as a traitor during the Second World War. English as a china spaniel, but Fenian to his core. He left a wife and one child, a daughter called Philippa. The wife died in

Canada, so her rich brother Robert Wheeler brought little Philippa back to live in England with his family. She grew up as Philippa Wheeler and in due course married one Peter Delft, bearing a child, unnamed, ungendered and undated in the file. Peter Delft died in September, nineteen sixty-one, if memory serves — which of course it does. In April nineteen sixty-three she remarried the merchant banker Jeremy Blackrow and by the time I came across the file in sixty-three no one had ever bothered to update it from that day forward. Thus Philippa Custance became Philippa Wheeler became Philippa Delft became Philippa Blackrow. I only read Jack Custance’s file to research his early life. I had been given the tedious job of writing a paper on the profile of your typical British republican sympathiser, as if such a definable type ever existed.’

‘Philippa Blackrow was Oliver Delft’s mother?’ Ned enunciated each word with extreme deliberation, as if afraid the meaning of what he said would totter and collapse. ‘He was her son. He was the son of the very person Paddy wanted me to give the letter to?’

‘No cross referencing,’ said Babe with a disapproving purse of the lips. ‘Her son applies to the service and they don’t connect Oliver Delft with the daughter of a con?demned traitor. Well, how can we expect an intelligence service that can’t spot a full Colonel of the KGB in its ranks to notice a small thing like that? But no wonder Oliver had a touch of cramp when you mentioned her name out of the blue. Must have put the fear of God into him.’

‘So he was a traitor too?’

‘Perhaps, but not necessarily. He might have joined without knowing anything about his mother’s true allegiances.’

‘In either case,’ said Ned, ‘he couldn’t allow me to wander about the world knowing her name.

‘Precisely. If he was any good at his job he would have to find a way to get rid of you and cover all your tracks. We know how he got rid of you. But I wonder how he hid the trail ...' Babe’s voice trailed off.

Ned grasped him by the sleeve. ‘What are you thinking?’

‘You have to think of it from Delft’s point of view,’ murmured Babe, more to himself than to Ned. ‘He’s on duty. A flash comes through that a youth has been picked up with a document that might interest the service. He interrogates you, all seems fine, you turn out to be nothing but an innocent. He discovers his own mother is implicated. What can he do? His section chief will ask all kinds of questions next day. “We see from the log, Oliver, that you were sent out to a police station. Who was this boy? What did he have on him?” What would I do if I were Delft?’

‘I don’t follow,’ said Ned. ‘What exactly...

‘Sh!’ Babe put a finger to his lips, ‘I would pretend to be playing you, that’s what I’d do. “I’ve turned him, Chief. He’s feeding me all kinds of gold. But hands off, he’s mine and I don’t want him compromised.” But he would need to give something in return. There’s the tape, of course, but that had his mother’s name on it — he’d need another. Did he, Ned, did he by any chance get you to say anything specific on the tape? After his attack of cramp, that is?’

‘I’m not sure ... yes! Portia’s family! He wanted to know about her father. I told him what I knew and he asked for the full address. He even asked me to say it twice. But why? I still don’t understand.’

‘Mine was a grubby trade,’ said Babe. ‘Let me tell you what Oliver did.’

That night, as Ned lay awake, another name joined the others pounding inside his head. Now it was Delft, Fendeman, Garland and Cade.

Delft, Fendeman, Garland and Cade. Delft, Fendeman, Garland and Cade. He banged the names with his fist against his thigh. He scratched them with his nails into the palm of his hand. He burned the names into his brain. Delft, Fendeman, Garland and Cade. Delft, Fendeman, Garland and Cade.

Spring on the island was a time when, in the past, Ned had always felt at his most imprisoned. As the long winter melted away and the days lengthened, birds would begin to arrive bringing thoughts of a world outside. As they built their nests and started to sing, Ned would feel the limits of his own mind. No amount of literature, science or philosophy could counter the absolute beauty of the daffodils and the birdsong, nor palliate the terrible achings they awoke in him.

One day in mid-April, just a week after the sun-room had been opened up for the year, Ned sat at the chessboard waiting for Babe. They rarely played these days. It embarrassed Ned that he could beat the older man so easily and it annoyed him that Babe seemed so devoid of will as not to care who won.

Martin came out into the sunlight, blinking. He approached Ned with a smile.

‘You waiting for Babe, I suppose?’

‘Of course,’ replied Ned.

‘You wait long time then. Babe had some heart attack last night. Babe is in his bed dying right now.’

Ned sprang to his feet and grabbed Martin by the coat.

‘Hey, Thomas! You let go. You want to be strapped up in punishment cell?’

‘Take me to him!’ Ned yelled. ‘Take me to him right now.

‘I don’t take you to nobody,’ Martin sneered. ‘Who you think you are? You don’t tell me orders. I tell you orders.’

Ned let go of Martin’s collar and started to smoothe it down placatingly. ‘Please, Martin,’ he said. ‘Try to understand. Babe is everything to me. He is my father, my brother and my only friend. We are like ... we are like you and Henrik.’ Ned gestured towards where a young newly-arrived Swede was sat trembling and hugging his knees in a basket-chair at the other end of the room. ‘You and Henrik, how close you are. How wonderful it is. It is the same with Babe and me. You understand don’t you? You do understand. I know Dr Mallo would understand. He would want me to be with Babe now, I am sure of it.’

Martin’s eyes narrowed and then dropped. ‘I let you see Babe, you don’t go talking bad things about me to Dr Mallo?’

‘Never, Martin. Never would I say bad things about you to Dr Mallo. You are my friend, Martin. My good friend.’

Ned allowed Martin to lead him to the hospital wing. It took him past Mallo’s office and into a corridor down which he had never been before.

Babe was the only patient in the small four-bed ward. Lying on his back with a tube up his nose, he seemed shrunken and old. Ned knelt by his bed and looked at the face he loved so deeply.

‘Babe,’ he whispered, ‘Babe, it’s Thomas.’

‘I come back half an hour,’ said Martin, closing and locking the door. ‘You go then. Not see Babe again.’

Ned could see the thick orbs of Babe’s eyeballs rolling under the loosened skin of his eyelids.

‘Ned?’ The name came out in a whispered breath.

Ned took a hand. ‘It’s me,’ he said, tears starting to roll down his face. ‘Babe, you can’t leave me. You mustn’t leave me. Please ... please ... I’ll go mad. I know I’ll go mad.’ His voice cracked and he gave a huge sob. ‘Babe! Oh Christ, Babe! I will kill myself if you go. I swear to Christ I will.’

Babe pushed out his blackened tongue and passed it over dry and flaking lips. ‘I am dying,’ he said. ‘They will pack me in a box in the room next to this. I heard them talking when I woke up an hour ago. They will seal me in a crate and take me to the mainland where I will be certified dead, nailed into a coffin and sent home. They will burn me in England.’

‘Please don’t talk like this,’ the tears were dropping from Ned’s face onto the bed sheets.

‘We have half an hour, no more,’ whispered Babe, ‘so you must listen to me. In sixty-nine I was preparing to leave England. They caught me before I could leave and they brought me here, but they never guessed what I had been up to.'

‘Babe, please! You’re working yourself up...’

‘If you don’t listen,’ Babe took Ned’s hand and gripped it hard, ‘I shall die here and now!’ he hissed. ‘Be silent for once and listen. They took me before I could escape. But I had taken money. I knew the account numbers, dozens of them. I remembered them all. I funnelled and finagled them, united them all into one grand account. Here, take it, take it!’





THE STARS’




Babe opened the hand that had been grasping Ned’s. A small fold of paper was clipped between his fingers. ‘Take it. There is money there, perhaps after thirty years it is more than you can spend. The Cotter Bank, Geneva. When they found out that it was missing they came here to question me. I had hidden its trail and they were mad with rage. “Where is it? What have you done with it?” I had been here no more than a month, but Mallo had passed that month jolting my brain with electricity and filling me with drugs. The violence of my behaviour had given him no choice. I had known they would come you see, and I wanted to be ready. When they arrived, I dribbled, I giggled, I simpered, I slobbered and I wept. You would have been proud of me, Ned. I was the maddest of the mad. A ruin of a noble mind. They went away cursing, in the belief that they had destroyed the sanity of the only man that knew where all that money lay. I’d love to know how they explained it to their Minister. Now, read that piece of paper, learn it and destroy it. The Cotter Bank, Geneva. All the money will be yours when you leave here.’

‘Why do you think I want money?’ Ned’s tears still flowed in an endless stream. ‘I don’t want money, I want you! If you die, I will die. You know I will never leave this place.’

‘You will leave this place!’ cried Babe with terrible urgency. ‘You will leave in a coffin. Listen to me. There is a metal spoon by my bed, take it now. Take it!’

Ned, weeping at this inconsequential madness, took the spoon.

‘Hide it on you, no not there. Not in a damned pocket! Suppose Martin searches you?’

‘Where?’ Ned looked down at Babe in bewilderment.

‘Your anus, man! Push it deep in your anus. I don’t care if it bleeds.’

‘Oh Babe...’

‘Do it, do it now or I swear by almighty Christ that I’ll die cursing you. There! I don’t care if it makes you scream. I don’t care if you bleed like a pig, push it up, push it up! Now, can you stand? Can you sit? Good, good, you’ll do.’

Babe leant back down on the pillow and slowed his breath. ‘Now then,’ he said at last. ‘Now then, Ned. You’ve got the piece of paper. Look at it. The Cotter Bank, Geneva. I dared not write that down. See on the paper. There’s a number, a password phrase and a counter phrase.

Learn them. Repeat them to me... good, and again. Again ... once more. Now swallow the paper. Chew it and swallow. Repeat the number ... the passwords ... the address again.’

‘Why are you doing this, Babe? You’re frightening me.’

‘I owe you the money. Backgammon. You’re a devil at the game. Not much more now, lad. Cast your mind back to last winter. The week before Christmas. The day we talked together about Philippa Blackrow. I had been drawing a circuit diagram for you, do you remember? You kept it, like I told you?’

‘It’s in my room, I suppose. With all my other papers. Why?’

‘It’s Thursday. Paul is on night duty. You get on all right with Paul. Hold him in conversation, ask him about football as he closes you in. You’ll need your wits to time it. Use the teaspoon to catch the lock. There’s so much for you to do. You’ll need all your strength. I’ll go on the morning boat to the mainland. Christ, what’s that I can hear?’

A key rattled in the lock and the door swung open. Martin beckoned to Ned.

‘You come with me now. Leave Babe, come with me.’

‘You said half an hour!’

‘The doctor, he comes to look at Babe. You come.

Ned threw himself down on the bed, his tear-sodden face soaking Babe’s beard.

‘Goodbye, my boy. You have already saved my life. My mind will live forever in yours. Build great things in my memory and to my memory. We have loved each other. For my sake now, stop your howling. Go quietly and pass this last day in remembering. Remember everything. You take my love and memory with you for ever.’

‘Come now! Now!’ Martin strode to the bed and pulled Ned roughly away. ‘Against the wall. I search you. Many bad things in the hospital ward.’

From the doorway, Ned cast one last look back into the room as Martin pushed him against the wall.

Babe’s eyes were closed tight. All his concentration now was being spent on forcing his heart to beat faster and faster until it might burst in his chest.

An hour after lunch, Martin came to the sun-room with the news that Babe had died.

Ned, sitting alone at the chessboard, nodded. ‘Was he in pain?’

‘No pain,’ Martin’s voice was quiet and almost reverential. ‘Very peaceful. He has quick heart attack once more and was dead fast. Dr Mallo say there was nothing nobody could do,’ he added, with a hint of defensiveness. ‘Not in any hospital in the world.’

‘Would you mind,’ Ned asked quietly, ‘if I spent the rest of the day in my room? I would like to think and.., and to pray.

‘Okay, I take you there.’

They walked in silence to Ned’s room. Martin looked around at the piles of books and papers leaning up against the walls. ‘Babe, he teached you many things, yes?’

‘Yes, Martin. Many things.’

‘Some books in my language here, but you are not speaking.’

‘A little, I can read a little, but not speak very well,’ Ned replied, in halting Swedish.

‘Yes. Your accent is bad. Maybe, now Babe gone, we are better friends,’ said Martin. ‘You teach English, I teach Swedish. You teach music and the mathematics to me also.’

‘That would be nice,’ said Ned. ‘I would like that.’

‘I leave school early. I run from home where my father was beating me. The more you teach, the better friends.’

‘All right.’

‘It’s not necessary you have to be nice with me,’ Martin said, looking awkwardly at the floor. ‘I understand this. Sometimes, I am bad. I have bad feelings in my heart. You must have me in your prayers now.

‘Of course, Ned felt unwanted tears falling down his cheeks again.

‘Okay, Thomas,’ said Martin. ‘I leave now.’

It took almost half an hour for Ned to find the circuit diagram that Babe had drawn and two hours for him to be sure that he had memorised and understood it properly.

Paul came on duty at supper-time and Ned practised without the teaspoon by engaging Paul in brief conversation just as he was pulling the door closed.

‘Oh by the way,’ he said, holding the door by the handle on the inside and talking through the gap. ‘Before you lock up. You couldn’t do me a favour could you? In return for me teaching you the nicknames of all the British football clubs. Just a small thing.’

‘Favour?’ Paul looked worried.

‘You wouldn’t have a piece of chewing gum, would you?’

Paul grinned. ‘Maybe at supper time. I’ll see.’

‘Thanks. Are Trondheim playing today?’

‘Sure they are playing today.’

‘Good luck then,’ said Ned cheerfully, pushing the door closed himself. ‘See you later.’

At nine o’clock Paul came in once more with a mug of hot chocolate and some pills.

‘What’s this?’ Ned was alarmed. ‘I’m not on medication.’

‘Dr Mallo is worried that you are upset about Babe,’

Paul explained. ‘They are not strong. Just to help you sleep.’

‘Okay then,’ said Ned cheerfully, slapping them to his mouth and swallowing. ‘Very thoughtful of the good doctor.’

‘And here is some chewing gum for you.

Ned took the stick of gum and beamed. ‘Hollywood, how glamorous! Paul, you’re a hero.’

‘Good night, Thomas. Have a good sleep.’

‘Oh tell me though,’ said Ned, stopping Paul from closing the door again. ‘How did Trondheim do?’

Ned held the spoon in his right hand, which he held casually against the side of the door. He leaned harder and harder, with only a gap of an inch through which he could talk to Paul, the handle of the spoon pressing against the sprung lock.

‘Three goals to one? A great victory for you,’ he said. ‘Well, I’ll see you in the morning perhaps. Goodnight.’

With one last push, Ned closed the door. The spoon handle projected into the room from the gap between the door and the jamb. As Paul’s footsteps died away down the corridor, Ned pulled at the door, which gave. The spoon was holding back the lock spring. Almost sobbing with relief, Ned returned to his desk, spat out the sleeping pills and for the last time unfolded Babe’s circuit diagram.

At what he judged to be a time somewhere between half past two and three in the morning, he went to his door and pulled it open. The spoon dropped to the floor with a metallic clatter and, cursing himself as the sound rang around the corridor, Ned stooped to pick it up.

No sound came from any part of the building as he walked past the empty sun-room, chewing on his Holly?wood gum. Only the clicking of the bones in his bare feet and toes disturbed the huge vacuum of silence that hung over the building like a shroud.

When he reached the door to Mallo’s office, he listened for a minute before entering. Once inside, he switched on the desk light and looked around, blinking at the sudden glare. The curtains were drawn, but there would be a line of light showing under the door. He knew there was very little time to lose. He went straight to a wooden box on the wall, opened it and took out a key. An impulse made him take out another, smaller key and try it in the lock of the small grey filing cabinet against the opposite wall. The key fitted and Ned searched quickly about the rest of the office until he found a plastic shopping bag into which he pushed sheaf after sheaf of papers and files. Tying the top of the carrier bag in a tight knot, he took out the chewing gum, swallowed the small key, popped the gum back in his mouth, switched off the desk light and crept back out into the corridor.

As he approached the staff quarters, rhythmically chewing on his gum, he pressed the carrier-bag under his arm hard against his body to diminish the rustle it made as he walked. He could hear music playing and saw an oblong fall of light in the passageway ahead. The room where Paul would be sitting had a window that looked over the passageway through which Ned had to pass. He crept slowly towards it and had just dropped to his knees ready to crawl along the floor under the line of view when the door opened and Paul walked out. Ned’s heart jumped and his whole body froze. The carrier bag crackled, sounding in Ned’s ears like a truck running over a thousand plastic egg-cartons.

Paul crossed straight over into the room opposite without looking in Ned’s direction. The vigorous splash of a stream of urine tumbling into a lavatory bowl echoed around the corridor and trembling with relief, Ned rose and walked forward. As he passed the door he gave a quick glance to his left and saw Paul standing legs apart, his back to the corridor, shaking off and humming the Ode to Joy. He wore a tee-shirt and jeans and the unprecedented sight of such ordinary clothes awoke feelings of great excitement in Ned. They seemed to assure him that the outside world was real and within reach.

He rounded the corner and leant against the wall. The night was cool, but still he could feel trickles of cold sweat running from his temples onto the back of his neck. He stopped chewing and listened, his mouth open. He heard the sound of a flush, footsteps crossing the corridor and a door closing. Spearmint saliva was dribbling from his open mouth. He sucked it in and started to chew again.

On the wall opposite him he saw the winking green light of the alarm box. Tip-toeing across, he examined it close up, mentally laying Babe’s diagram of the control box over the real thing. The circuit that controlled the hospital corridor was designated as Zone 4. Ned took the key he had taken from Mallo’s office and tried to fit it into the master lock. It slipped out of the lock and for one heart-stopping moment he thought he might have swallowed the wrong key. He tried again and this time it slipped in easily. With a gulp of relief, he gave it a half turn to the right. The winking green light became a winking red light. Holding his breath, he flicked up the fourth in a row of dip-switches that ran the length of the control-box and moved the key another quarter turn to the right. He held it there for a second then switched it twice to the left, returning it to its original location. As the key passed from three o’clock on its way to the home position, the whole unit gave a quick blaring bleep of such intensity that Ned almost yelled in fright. Backing into the doorway opposite he waited, eyes fixed on the lights of the control box. The green light was flashing again, but there was a new red light next to it which winked four times in succession, paused then winked four times again, revealing to anyone who knew the system that Zone 4 had been by-passed. No doors opened or closed in the staff room around the corner and no alteration came in the volume of the music emerging from Paul’s radio. Only in Ned’s ears had the bleep blasted like a cavalry bugle sounding in hell. Approaching the alarm-box once more, Ned gently pulled out the key. The lights flashed as before but all was quiet. He pulled a tiny wad of gum from his mouth and pressed it over the winking red beam, tamping it firmly so that no light leaked out from the sides. He stepped back to look.

It worried him that whoever disabled the alarm in the morning would spot the little plug of chewing-gum. If they noticed it after switching off the alarm it might mean nothing, but if they removed the gum while the system was still active, the four flashes of light would tell them everything they needed to know and all hell would break loose. Ned pressed against the lump of gum with the end of the key, working it flat until he felt that it was flush with the surface of the control-box. By the small green glow that offered the only light to work by, Ned pressed and sculpted until he believed that the gum had become as good as invisible.

Satisfied finally that everything appeared normal, he put the key in his mouth and moved silently towards the doors that led to the hospital wing.

Babe was dead and he, Ned, had not felt more alive for over twenty years. The blood was singing in his ears, his heart thumped and banged in his chest like a slapping belt-driven engine and every nerve in his body vibrated with power and energy. No matter what happened to him now he knew he could never regret the return of so much intense excitement. If Dr Mallo and all the staff were to leap out from the next doorway, if Rolf were to pin him to the wall and dislocate his shoulders again and all privileges, books and papers were taken away for ever, if he were made to subsist on nothing from now on but a regime of chlorpromazine and electric shocks, still it would have been worth it just to have experienced this short burst of true living.

Dr Mallo and the staff did not leap out from the next doorway. The next doorway led to the room adjacent to the ward where Babe had died and the hospital wing remained as quiet as the tomb it was serving as. Ned put his hand to the doorknob and turned the handle. If he had made a mistake with the alarm-box he would discover it now. He pushed the door open. No bells jangled, no sirens wailed. All was silent. He closed the door behind him and felt for a light-switch.

He had found himself in a store room whose walls were lined with shelves filled with rows of medical supplies. In the centre of the room was a trestle-table on which stood a packing case about seven feet long and three feet wide with thick rope handles attached to the end sides. Ned approached the table and laid his hands on the lid of the packing case.

‘Hello, Babe,’ he whispered. ‘So far so good.’

He laid down the carrier bag and looked about him. The teaspoon was still gripped in his left hand but he had hoped he might find something stronger. He searched the shelves and saw nothing that would help him. He had almost given up when he glimpsed the end side of a metallic blue toolbox under the table itself.

Helping himself to a heavy-handled chisel, Ned set to work on prising the lid free, being careful not to bend any of the nails. It took close to fifteen minutes and Ned was sweating profusely by the time he lifted the lid clear and laid it on the floor.

Inside the crate Babe’s body was covered in a white sheet. Ned swallowed, gripped the fabric and plucked it away. He almost screamed in shock.

Babe was smiling. It was the smile that Ned had come to love over the last ten years. It was the wicked grin of complicity, excitement and pleasure that always preceded a new lesson in a new field.

Wait till you meet Joyce, old lad!

And next week, Faraday and magnets — prepare to be astounded!

The Battle of Lepanto tomorrow, Ned my boy! Wagner. Richard Wagner! Once in your system, never out.

The Marshall attack. Not an opening for the faint?hearted.

Let’s say Heil to Herr Schopenhauer, shall we?

Russian verbs of motion, Ned. They’ll drive you mad.

Ned leaned down and stroked Babe’s beard.

‘Here we go,’ he said.

Ned was prepared to find the body heavy and had planned in his mind all evening how he would set about lifting Babe out of the crate. In his mind he had imagined that he would put a hand under each of his arms, summon up all his strength and heave until Babe’s body was draped face down over Ned’s back in a kind of fireman’s lift. What Ned had not foreseen was the enormous strain this would throw on his weak shoulders. As he strained at Babe’s dead weight he could feel the socket of the left shoulder grinding in the old familiar way. He had not put one of them out for at least seven or eight years and while he knew perfectly well how to snap the socket back, tonight he could not allow anything to disable him. He decided to try letting his right shoulder take the weight instead. He drew in nine or ten sharp lungfuls of breath and pulled.

Staggering from the table with Babe over his shoulder, Ned sank down to the floor, sweat pouring from him and his right shoulder on fire with pain. Babe’s head banged against the floor and his body tumbled to the ground with a crack of bone as the neck snapped like a dry twig.

Ned rose unsteadily to his feet and gently stretched out his arms. The right shoulder gave a small click but held in its socket. Inhaling and exhaling deeply, Ned forced his breathing to slow to a calmer rhythm and waited for the trembling in his arms and legs to stop. Stretching and inhaling deeply once more he switched off the lights, opened the door and listened. Satisfied that no sound other than the thumping of his heart pierced the deep black silence of the night, he bent down and hooked a hand under each of Babe’s arms.

He pulled the body slowly along the corridor of the hospital wing and reached the alarm-box. The radio around the corner was playing music. Ned recognised it to be Grieg’s Death of Åse and instinctively looked down at Babe, as if to share the joke.

He dragged the body around the corner and laid it down face up. Crouching at Babe’s feet, he pushed him forward along the ground and past the door to the staff room. If Paul came out for another pee, he could not help but trip over the corpse and all would be lost. Bent as low as possible without losing his purchase on the soles of Babe’s feet, Ned pushed again. He was now directly below the window and he pushed faster and faster, wishing that the radio had programmed something louder and more percussive. If it was to be funereal, why not Siegfried’s Death, Verdi’s Dies Ire or the March to the Scaffold? The muted strings of Grieg whined on as Ned cleared the window, stood up and resumed the more comfortable grip under Babe’s arms that allowed him to drag the body backwards over the linoleum that led to his own wing.

Back in his room, it took another shoulder-wrenching effort to heave Babe onto the bed. He did so without first pulling back the blankets and had to rock the body backwards and forwards on its side before he could loosen the bed sheets and cover Babe up, cursing himself for his stupidity. He imagined Babe too tutting at such a lack of foresight and common sense.

‘Sorry,’ he whispered. ‘Mea culpa. Mea maxima culpa.’

Ned arranged the head on the pillow, pulled up the blankets and bent down to lay a final kiss on Babe’s head. ‘Goodbye my best and dearest friend. Whatever happens, you have saved my life.’

On his way back to the store room Ned returned to Mallo’s office and replaced the alarm-key, parking the residue of his gum under the doctor’s grand leather chair. One day Dr Mallo would find it and wonder how it got there.

Ducking under the staff-room window, from which Rossini’s overture to the Barber of Seville now blasted triumphantly, Ned passed by the alarm-box and made his way back to the store room, closing the door behind him and switching on the light.

He could not afford now to make the slightest mistake and he prepared everything he needed with meticulous care. He dropped the carrier bag into the crate and looked around the room. An idea had come to him as he had been dragging Babe’s body along the corridors and he searched the shelves now until he came upon a box marked ‘Diacetylmorphine EP’. He ripped it open and emptied its contents, dozens and dozens of polythene bags, into the crate, throwing in for good measure a polythene bag filled with syringes. He looked down and saw that there was room for another boxful too. And another. After a moment’s thought he added a waste disposal sack, large enough to contain all the polythene bags and the carrier bag he had taken from Mallo’s office too.

His initial plan had been to cannibalise screws from the hinge of the door and work them into the inside of the lid using the tea-spoon as a screw-driver, but he discovered that the blue toolbox contained a small jar of wood-screws and even a brace and selection of drill bits. One thing he could not find however was rope, so he tore strips from the sheet that had covered Babe’s body and plaited them tightly together. He held this home-made rope against the inside of the top of the crate and drilled with the brace, being careful not to break through to the other side of the lid. He screwed the plaited cloth tightly into the wood, with just enough give to offer a firm hand hold, which he tested by tugging on it with all his strength until he could be sure that the cloth would not rip and that the screws would hold fast.

Ned now laid the lid on top of the crate, lining up the nails with their original holes. He pushed down and saw that three of the nails, instead of finding their holes, jumped up proud. He readjusted each one and tried again. When he was reasonably sure that each nail would find home he pulled off the lid once more and laid it upside down crossways over the crate.

He gave a final look around the room, kicking the toolbox under the table into its original position. He glanced about the shelves and down at the floor. With the exception of the lid lying across the crate, everything was as it had been when he had first walked in.

Drawing in a deep breath, Ned switched off the light and moved slowly forward in the pitch darkness until he felt his leg bump against the table. He climbed onto it and stood slowly up, his head nearly brushing the ceiling. He picked up the lid and felt at it until his fingers closed on the loop of cloth. He lifted the lid by this handle and, holding it in front of him like a Norman shield, he stepped into the crate and lay back on his bed of polythene. Manoeuvring the lid into position and satisfying himself that, so long as he pulled down on his plaited handle, all was well, Ned concentrated so hard on staying awake that he fell asleep almost instantly.

The bang of the store-room door opening awoke Ned with a jolt. Tiny slivers of light pierced the darkness of the packing-crate and at first he was convinced that too much time had passed. Perhaps they had decided to keep the body longer and send it on an evening boat. Babe would already have been discovered in Ned’s room and the hunt would be up. He cursed himself for sleeping. If he had stayed awake he might have realised that too much time had passed and managed to escape another way. Babe had assured him that the island was at least thirty miles from land, but attempting to swim for freedom would have been better than ignominious discovery here.

The sound of weary morning voices yawning and moaning reassured him. Working his hand into the cloth loop, Ned pulled down on the lid as hard as he could and waited, hardly daring to breath.

Two male voices spoke in Danish.

‘We’ll take it on our shoulders.’

‘What’s the rope on the ends for?’

‘Yah, but it will bite into our hands. Believe me, I’ve done this before. On our shoulders. You first, one, two... three.’

‘I thought it was going to be an old man. Christ, he’s heavy.’

‘It’ll be the wood mostly. Come on.’

‘Ow!’

‘What is it?’

‘You were supposed to hammer the nails in. I just cut my finger!’

Ned lost all sense of direction as his body bumped back and forth inside the crate. He was dropped onto the floor twice when doors had to be unlocked and opened and each time Ned was fearful that the lid would bounce up and he would be discovered. He prepared in his mind the possibility of having to fight for it and run.

Finally, cold morning air seeped through the sides of the box and he heard the cry of gulls followed by the groaning creak of a sliding van door. The crate was pushed with bone-jarring carelessness onto a metal floor, the door slammed shut and an engine started.

Ned recalled the infernal torture of his last journey in a van. He saw again the two dead eyes of the men who had kicked him to unconsciousness and heard the rhythmical flipping of tyres over a ribbed causeway. He remembered Mr Gaine and he remembered every detail of those two brutal men. He could not, however, reassemble in his mind the identity of the Ned who had undergone those infernal torments of soul and body. That Ned had been as innocent, terrified and blinded by the world and its cruelty as a newborn puppy. He had been a particle, without will, direction or purpose. That Ned had been dead for almost twenty years: all the life had been snuffed out of him the day Rolf had dislocated his left shoulder and murdered his last remaining shreds of hope and faith. The Ned who travelled now was an entirely different being, a man of iron will, an avenging angel — an instrument of God.

Ned stood up on the rocks and turned to look at the ferry half a mile out to sea. When she put in, the crew would carry the wooden box, now weighed down with sea-chain and iron tackle, to the dock where, after a time, it would be opened and the deception discovered. Perhaps the island had already sent a message to shore and Ned was already a wanted man.

He shivered and unwound from his aching shoulders a large yellow oilskin bag that he had stolen from the captain’s locker on board the ferry. In the locker he had also found clothing and a wallet containing two and a half thousand Danish kroner. He had no idea whether it was a fortune or barely enough for a small breakfast.

Half an hour later he walked into a crowded café on the Århus road. He had not been surprised to discover that he was in Denmark. Babe had told him that the hospital island lay in the Kattegat, somewhere between the Swedish coast and northern Jutland. Ned marched straight to the counter and ordered a cup of coffee and a plate of eggs and bacon. He took a seat and looked around him. He had seen five large lorries parked outside and decided that his best course was boldness and speed.

‘Hey!’ he called out above the noise of the juke box. Everyone in the café looked up and stared at him. ‘Any?body here going south? I need to be in Germany by tonight. I’ll go halves on the fuel.’

Most of the men in Ned’s eyeline shrugged and looked back down at their plates. One or two shook their heads regretfully, but no one responded. Damn, thought Ned, what do I do now?

A voice behind him spoke up in broken Danish. ‘I have to be in Hamburg tonight. You are welcome to ride with me.

‘Fantastic!’ cried Ned, in German. ‘You’ve saved my life!’

‘Oh, you’re German,’ said the other. ‘Thank Christ for that. Danish is a nightmare.’

‘I know,’ said Ned with a sympathetic smile. ‘Trying to speak it gives you a nosebleed. Let me buy you a cup of coffee, you don’t mind waiting while I dive into a quick breakfast do you?’

‘No problem,’ said the other, coming round to join Ned at his table and extending his hand. ‘Dieter, by the way.

‘Karl,’ said Ned. ‘Pleased to know you. Ah, prachtvoll!’ He smiled up at the waitress as a plate was put in front of him. ‘And a cup of coffee for my friend here,’ he added in Danish.

Someone had left a newspaper on the table and Ned searched it for a currency table. With relief, he worked out that he was carrying over two hundred pounds. Unless inflation had gone entirely insane over the last twenty years, he reckoned it should be enough to get him where he wanted to go.

Ned rode up front with Dieter, who told him that he had picked up a consignment of paper pulp in Skagen fifty miles north of the roadside café they were leaving, which was just outside the port of Ålborg. Ned calculated that they still had a drive of a hundred and fifty miles south to the German border. The ferry would be putting in at the harbour in Ålborg now. It was all a question of whether or not Dr Mallo had decided to alert the police. He would have discovered that there were papers missing from his filing-cabinet and Ned was confident that this would prevent him from contacting anyone in authority. Perhaps Mallo would call Oliver Delft, probably he would not dare. In Mallo’s position, Ned would fabricate a death certificate and try and forget that the troublesome Englishman had ever existed.

Dieter was not a demanding conversationalist. His world appeared to revolve around his wife Trude and their children, of whom there were photographs displayed all around the cabin, and football of which Ned knew little. What he did know was confined to what he had learned of the Scandinavian leagues from Paul. The doings of Trondheim held no interest for Dieter whatsoever.

‘Not much traffic,’ Ned remarked at one point.

‘April sixteenth,’ said Dieter. ‘It’s a public holiday here. The queen’s birthday, so they tell me.’

‘Ah, of course.’

They stopped for lunch outside Århus and here Ned made his first mistake. They were sitting at a table and Ned picked up a small object that Dieter had brought with him into the café.

‘What on earth is this?’ he had asked, holding it in his hand and staring at it in bewilderment.

‘You’re joking!’ Dieter smiled broadly. His eyes narrowed when he saw that Ned was completely serious. ‘Are you telling me that you don’t know what this is?’

Ned realised that he had blundered and tried to laugh it off. ‘What I mean to say is,’ he said, ‘I’ve not seen one like this before

‘Not seen one like this? Look around you, man!’

Ned glanced at the other tables and saw at least six almost identical objects.

‘Well, it’s the colour really...’ he said, with an attempt at heartiness. ‘Yours is red, the others are mostly black and grey.

‘Where have you been the last ten years?’ Dieter asked. ‘Where on God’s earth is there a place without mobile phones?’

Phones! Mobile phones. Ned cursed himself for not working it out for himself. Now that he looked he could see two people speaking into them. ‘I’ve... I’ve not been well,’ he said. ‘I’ve been in a hospital.’

‘A prison more like.’

‘No, no, a hospital. You must believe me, Dieter. I’m fine now. Totally well, but I have ... you know, missed out on some things.’

Dieter let Ned back into the lorry, but he was more silent as they continued the journey south towards Åbenrå and the German border. Ned sat beside him, thinking furi?ously. He came to the conclusion that his best recourse was a kind of limited honesty. The last thing he wanted was for Dieter to flag down a police car. It would be hard to explain the quantity of drugs packed into his oilskin bag.

‘I’ll be straight with you, Dieter,’ he said at last. ‘I’ve escaped from a Danish hospital. My family put me there because of a drug problem, but I’m fine now. Really. Absolutely fine. I’m heading for Hanover to be with my girlfriend. I’ve messed up my life, but I’m better now. I just need help to get home.’

‘How long were you there?’ asked Dieter, his eyes firmly on the road.

‘Nearly a year.

‘Nearly a year and you don’t know what a mobile phone is?’

‘They gave me electric shock therapy. I forget things sometimes. What can I say? I’m not a bad man, Dieter, I promise you that.’

‘Sure,’ said Dieter and he fell quiet again.

After an agonising silence which Ned did not dare break with pleadings or further justification, Dieter spoke again, shyly and with some embarrassment. ‘Me, I had a drug problem too some years back. I am a trained engineer, you know? I had a very good job, lots of money. I got a little too fond of the heroin and I lost my job. With thanks to my marvellous wife Trude and the mercy and love of my saviour Jesus Christ I am now a clean and healthy person. I shall take you to Hamburg and introduce you to my church. A church is better than any hospital. Only the Lord can help people like us.’

‘Bless you,’ whispered Ned. ‘You are truly a Good Samaritan.’

‘I suppose,’ Dieter went on, after blushing slightly at the compliment, ‘that you do not have a passport?’

‘No,’ replied Ned. ‘I’m afraid I don’t.’

‘They do not always require them at the border, but even if they do not, the customs will certainly need to check my consignment papers. It is better they do not see you. We are ten miles away. I shall stop at the next filling-station and you must hide amongst the cargo. They do not search.’

‘Let me give you some money for the diesel.’

For a terrible moment Ned thought that he had said something wrong. Perhaps diesel was a thing of the past and lorries were now fuelled by methane, or hydrogen or God knew what else.

‘Money? I do not want your money,’ Dieter said. ‘I do this for my Saviour. That is my reward.’

As they drove the ten miles to the filling station, Ned, as gently as he dared, probed Dieter about his drug habit and how much money it had cost him.

‘Heroin is that expensive?’ he said wonderingly.

‘Sure, but it is cheaper if you smoke it,’ Dieter said. ‘You must know this, surely? What was your drug?’

‘Cannabis.’

‘Your family sent you to a hospital for cannabis? My God! My mother smokes a joint every evening.’

‘My parents are very old-fashioned,’ Ned said, uncomfortably aware that there was much about the world he had yet to learn.

Approaching the traffic-lights at the outskirts of Hamburg, Ned felt a pang of guilt as he grabbed his oil?skin bag, opened the door and jumped down onto the street.

‘Sorry, Dieter,’ he called back into the cabin. ‘But I really don’t think your church can help me.’

Dieter shook his head sorrowfully and pulled away with a hiss of brakes and a big double honk from his horn. Ned skipped aside and waved and waved until the lorry disappeared around a corner. He hoped that Dieter could at least see this last gesture in his wing-mirrors and know that his help had been appreciated.

Which indeed it had been. Ned had been crammed amongst the bales of pulp for no more than an hour either side of the border. The doors at the back had not even been opened, though the side of the lorry right next to Ned’s ear had been slapped twice as they had been waved through, causing him a ringing in the ears which was still with him. Dieter was amused and teased him about it all through Schleswig-Holstein.

‘It was the Lord speaking to you, Karl. Take my word for it.’

Ned turned now and looked around him. It was getting late and there was much to do. At a small Sparkasse he changed his kroner into Deutschmarks, then crossed the street to the underground station and took a train to St Pauli. He had a strong feeling that Babe was watching him now and would disapprove violently of what he was about to do.

From St Pauli he crossed the street into the Reeperbahn. Sitting at a window in the Bar Bemmel, opposite the Lehmitz, he sat nursing a glass of milk as the street outside warmed up into a whirl of touristic Friday night frenzy. The lights, the colour, the noise, the music were all absolutely alien to him. He saw men and women with jewellery and metal bars affixed to their noses, ears and eyebrows. He saw black men with dyed blonde hair, and orientals with orange hair. He saw men passing by holding hands. Once a woman with a shaved head poked her tongue out at him as she passed. There had been what looked like a metal stud in her tongue. Ned blinked and swallowed hard.

‘Oh, brave new world, that has such creatures in it ... he murmured to himself and shook his head, like a dog that has just taken a bath.

At the U-Bahn station he had bought a map and three tourist information booklets which he had read twice through before a waitress approached him and told him that if he was going to stay here he would need to drink more than one single glass of milk over the course of two hours.

‘Of course,’ said Ned. ‘Bring me one of those,’ he commanded, pointing at a pink looking cocktail at the table next to his.

‘All cocktails five marks,’ said the waitress.

Ned supposed (indeed had seen) that his Danish fisherman’s outfit of jeans, thick white pullover and donkey-jacket were not the usual habiliments favoured by the night people of Hamburg and he smiled understandingly as he produced a ten mark note.

‘I have been fishing all day. Keep the change and have a drink yourself.’

The suspicious scowl was instantly replaced by a happy grin. ‘Thank you, sir!’

‘Er, I forgot to ask,’ he said when the cocktail arrived. ‘What’s in it exactly?’

‘Cranberry, grapefruit and vodka,’ came the reply. ‘It’s called a Sea Breeze.'

‘Good title,’ said Ned, sipping cautiously. ‘Mm ... delicious.’

‘You’re are a tourist in Hamburg?’ The waitress pointed at the map and guides on the table in front of Ned.

‘That’s right. Just looking for a good time. Is this a dangerous area?’

‘The Reeperbahn? No!’ she laughed at the idea. ‘Once maybe, perhaps yes, but today it is all just businessmen and tourists.’

‘Ah,’ said Ned, ‘so there are no drug dealers or anything like that?’ He put the question innocently enough, but held the waitress’s eyes steadily.

She leaned forward to wipe down his table and whispered in his ear. ‘You looking for something perhaps? You can pay?’

‘I am looking for something,’ Ned replied. ‘Do you know anyone... er... respectable? I would be extremely grateful.’ He looked meaningfully into his wallet and back again at the waitress.

‘I’ll call my friend. He knows people. Are you interested in going uptown or downtown?’

Ned pondered her strange use of these American English phrases before the meaning became apparent to him.

‘Ah, I understand,’ he said. ‘Downtown, please.’

‘Okay.’ She looked a little surprised. ‘I’ll see what I can do.’

‘Thank you... er, I don’t know your name.

‘Cosima.’

‘Thank you, Cosima. Karl Freytag at your service.

Ned watched as Cosima went behind the bar to make a phone call. After less than thirty seconds she put down the phone and nodded to him. He nodded back and raised his glass to her in salutation. Picking up his oilskin, he went to the gents to prepare for his meeting.

The man who came into the Bar Bemmel half an hour later was older than Ned, perhaps as old as fifty, which surprised him. He looked more like a successful publisher or prosperous advertising executive than the tattooed leather-jacketed gangster that Ned had imagined.

‘Gunther. I understand that you are anxious to do business,’ said the man sitting down without a handshake. ‘How may I assist you, Herr Freytag?’

‘I want you to take what I am holding under the table,’ said Ned. ‘It is a syringe... don’t worry it’s capped.’

‘Hey listen,’ said Gunther, starting to rise. ‘I’m in the business of selling, not buying.’

‘Then find me someone who will buy,’ said Ned. ‘What I have is pharmaceutical grade liquid diamorphine, the purest heroin in the world. Enough to make you a great deal of money.

Gunther paused. ‘How much?’

‘I have half a million marks worth, which you can at least double if you cut it sensibly. I’ll take four hundred thousand in cash, a usable credit card and any contact that will allow me to buy a passport.’

Gunther looked Ned right in the eyes for perhaps five seconds before reaching under the table and taking the syringe.

‘Give me some more for testing.’

Ned was prepared for this. ‘Leave two thousand marks as a deposit,’ he said.

Gunther nodded and Ned passed a small vial under the table.

‘I make a phone call,’ Gunther stood up and took a small mobile phone from his pocket, moving away out of earshot. Ned watched him light a cigarette, dial and speak into the phone. He marvelled at the technology and wondered what the range of such telephones might be. Ned was too far away from Gunther to be able to pick up any of his conversation, but when he returned to the table everything seemed set up and he smiled a brief, tight smile.

‘Your two thousand’s in there,’ he said dropping a ciga?rette packet on the table. ‘I shall return in one hour. If everything is satisfactory we will go together to a place where the rest of your goods will also be checked out. Cosima is watching you. If you leave with my two thou?sand marks before I return, you will be followed and dealt with. Dealt with very harshly. If all goes well a passport can be ready for you in two days, the credit card and cash you will have tonight. You understand and approve?’

‘Perfectly,’ Ned extended his hand and smiled. ‘A bottle of champagne will await your return.’

‘Bis bald,’ said Gunther, shaking Ned’s hand briefly and turning to go.

‘Tschüs!’ said Ned.

Five minutes after Gunther had gone, Ned called Cosima over to him.

‘Thank you, Cosima,’ he said handing her a hundred mark note. ‘You have been very kind.’

Cosima smiled and tucked the note into her apron. ‘You’re welcome.’

‘So Gunther is your boyfriend?’

She laughed at this. ‘Oh no,’ she said. ‘He’s my father.’

Ned tried not to look surprised. ‘I see. Oh, tell me something, Cosima,’ he said, a thought occurring to him. ‘Which, in your opinion, is the best hotel in Hamburg?’

She looked at Ned through half closed eyes, like an artist sizing up a model. ‘For you, I should say the Vier Jahreszeiten on Neuer Jungfernstieg. Very classy. Very old-fashioned. Just like you.’

‘You flatter me. One more thing, before you bring me a cup of coffee and a glass of milk.’ The effect of the Sea Breeze was making him dizzy and light-headed. ‘Will I find a decent clothes shop in the area still open in an hour or so? I need some luggage too.’

‘This is Hamburg!’ said Cosima. ‘Nothing closes.’

‘Good. Perhaps we can go shopping together. After I have concluded business with you father, naturally.’

Cosima smiled happily. ‘My favourite occupation. Hugo Boss, I think. Something dark and elegant.’

The platinum American Express card that Gunther had found for Ned was in the name of Paul Kretschmer, and the blonde woman in black at the desk scarcely glanced at it as she slid it through the side of a machine she kept under the desk and passed it back to him with his room key. Ned supposed it was some kind of cash register, but it was unlike any he had seen before.

‘Oh, by the way,’ he said. ‘I need to fly to Geneva on Monday morning.’ He gave her a folded hundred mark note and his best smile. ‘Be good enough to arrange it for me would you?’

‘Certainly, Herr Kretschmer,’ she beamed at him. ‘With pleasure. Do you prefer Swiss Air or Lufthansa?’

‘I tell you what,’ said Ned, ‘you choose. First Class.’

‘First Class?’ she frowned slightly. ‘I am not sure they have First Class on such a short flight.’

‘Whatever...’ Ned waved a hand airily. ‘I’m sure you’ll find me the best seat.'

‘Of course, Herr Kretschmer. And may I help you with anything else this evening?’

‘It’s been a long day,’ Ned replied. ‘Nothing but a shower and bed. No calls please.’

He crossed over to the lifts, trying not to look impressed by the profusion of late nineteenth-century marble, mahogany and oak panelling all around him. No calls! He smiled at his own impudence.

The receptionist watched his firm athletic stride as he walked to the lifts and turned to the manager.

‘Oh, my God,’ she said with a sigh. ‘I think I’m in love.’

‘Me too,’ said the manager.

Ned spent Saturday morning playing with the television remote control and reading the magazines in his suite. Gunther called him up at lunchtime and invited him to dinner at his flat, just around the corner from the hotel.

‘I should be honoured and delighted,’ Ned replied. ‘I’m going to do some shopping this afternoon, I don’t suppose your charming daughter would be kind enough to escort me around the town? I assure you my intentions are strictly honourable.’

Gunther chuckled down the telephone. ‘That would disappoint her terribly,’ he said. ‘She was hoping they were anything but!’

With Cosima’s help Ned bought a laptop, a printer and a large number of books on computing and the internet. The magazines in his room had seemed to be full of articles on this and he wanted to understand everything he could about a world that appeared to be so important. He had asked Cosima shyly what the internet was and she had given an explanation that had left him more confused than before.

The shop that sold the computer had seemed to be nothing more nor less than an Aladdin’s cave of incomprehensible magic. Ned had tried not to look astonished at the pictures on the screens, at the colour photographs printed out, at the scanners, video cameras, global positioning devices and hand-held electronic diaries that were shown to him. Compact discs reminded him of an episode of Star Trek he had seen as a boy and the mobile phone he bought, which flipped out when he wanted to speak, put him even more firmly in mind of the Starship Enterprise. When he discovered that these telephones were more than walkie-talkies, but could actually be used to talk to any phone, mobile or otherwise in any country, he frankly gaped and Cosima and the shop assistant found it hard to suppress their giggles. He was Rip Van Winkle, awaking from a hundred-year sleep.

At the railway station overlooking the Alster, he sat in a photo-booth and had six passport photographs taken.

As he waited for the photographs to appear he murmured under his breath. ‘Thank God not everything has changed. These machines, I remember well.’

It took the hotel porter two journeys to transfer all Ned’s purchases from the taxi to his suite and he stood looking at the pile of shopping in the drawing-room with a look of such comical bewilderment on his face that Cosima reached up and kissed him.

‘Where have you come from, Karl?’

‘You mustn’t call me Karl,’ said Ned. ‘Here I am Paul Kretschmer.’

‘You have come from another planet. From heaven, perhaps?’

‘From heaven?’ Ned smiled. ‘No, I don’t think you could call it that.’

‘Where then? You have never seen a computer, a mobile phone, a CD, a Palm Pilot, a video camera.., where have you come from?’

She pulled him towards the bedroom, but he braced his legs like a mule.

‘Cosima...'

‘So. It follows that you are also probably a virgin. Don’t be frightened.’

Frightened.

It struck Ned, given all that he had done in the last twenty-four hours, and the strange universe he had emerged into after eighteen years that he should be frightened. He should be scared by this baffling world of infra-red, satellite positioning and microwaves, scared by its gadgets and buttons and bleeps. He should be scared too by his friendless isolation in this world, scared by Gunther and, most of all, he should be terrified out of his wits by the very fearless ease with which he had been able to achieve everything he had thus far. He knew, however, that he had become someone who would never feel fear again. In the past he had been afraid because of what had happened to him. Now and in the future, he would never be a passive victim of events. Nothing would ever happen to him. He would make things happen to others and fear would have no place in him.

‘All right,’ he said following Cosima into the bedroom. ‘Teach me, then. I’m a fast learner.’

The following afternoon Gunther paid a visit to the Vier Jahreszeiten and with a ta-da of triumph, produced from his jacket a gleaming German passport. Ned took it greedily, but before he had so much as turned the first page to look at his photograph, he had betrayed his ignorance once more.

‘Germany? But it doesn’t say which one...’

Gunther turned to his daughter with a look of astonish?ment. ‘Which one?’

‘There is only one Germany,’ said Cosima. ‘Since eighty-nine. Don’t tell me you didn’t know that?’

‘Ah, yes... of course.’ Ned smiled. ‘I... er... I forgot for a moment.'

‘Forgot?’ Gunther stared at him in disbelief.

‘And my last explanation of you,’ sighed Cosima, ‘was that you might be a lost Berliner from the East, tortured by the Stasi and only just returned to society. Now I am completely mystified.’

‘Who are you?’ Gunther asked. ‘Who the hell are you? You’re a German but you know nothing of Germany.’

‘Let’s just say I’ve been away. Does it matter? We have done business and we have helped each other. I am grateful to you both for everything.’ Ned picked up a bottle of champagne. ‘Tomorrow morning early, I fly to Switzerland, so let us drink to each other and part friends.’

‘Here,’ said Cosima, taking the bottle, ‘it helps if you twist the cork, like so. When will you be back?’

‘My plans are uncertain. ‘Tell me, Gunther. Do you happen to have any contacts in Geneva who might be useful to me?’

‘You have more to sell? If you do, believe me I would be happy to take any surplus off your hands.’

‘No, no. I may need another passport, that’s all.’

‘You should see my friend Nikki,’ said Gunther, scribbling a number on a card. ‘He’s a Russian, but nothing happens in Geneva without his permission.’

‘Thank you.’ Ned took the card and handed Gunther a glass. ‘Prosit.’

‘Prosit.’

Cosima was inclined to be tearful as she left with her father. ‘I will never see you again,’ she sniffed, clinging to Ned’s jacket.

‘Nonsense. You have been a wonderful friend to me, of course we shall see each other again. I do not forget friends. I will call for you one day.’

‘Come, my dear,’ said Gunther from the doorway. ‘Goodbye, Karl, Paul, whatever your name is. If you do happen across another consignment —‘

‘You will be the first to know,’ Ned assured him.

He closed the door and leaned against it.

Outside in the corridor he heard Gunther hiss to his daughter. ‘A mental patient, you mark my words.’

‘Daddy, he’s the sanest man either of us has ever met and you know it.’

‘He can’t even open a champagne bottle!’

‘And what proof of lunacy is that? You can’t open a pickle jar.’

‘Who else could get hold of medical grade stuff like that? It all fits, I tell you.’

They continued arguing as they went around the corner towards the lifts.

Ned smiled and looked at the room and the parcels around it. He had a great deal of packing to do.





THE STARS’




Ned walked into the hall of the Banque Cotter Cantonaise and smiled at the expensively pearled female cashier.

‘I wonder if I might see the manager about my account?’ It was all very well for Babe to write down numbers and passwords, but how did one actually go about the business of withdrawing money from a Swiss bank? Ned was entirely prepared to be disappointed. He imagined a smooth-faced bank official staring at him with super?cilious contempt.

‘This account was opened thirty years ago, sir. It cannot be yours.’

‘I ... it was my father’s.’

‘We have no instructions from him. Do you have papers, sir? Accreditation of any kind?’

In his mind, the striped-trousered official would press a bell under his desk and Ned would be tossed onto the pavement or even sent to gaol for attempted fraud. Or perhaps the British had got there first and left word with the bank.

‘Sir, this account was closed down many years ago. Our security officer will now escort you to the British Consulate.’

Maybe the whole thing had all been a figment of Babe’s imagination.

In the event things proved much simpler.

The cashier passed him a form and he filled in the account number. There was no space for passwords. She took the form, looked briefly down at it and, with the bang of an electric lock, disappeared into a room behind the guichet. Within a very short space of time a spruce young man, close enough to the striped-trousered official of Ned’s imagination to make him smile, came through into the banking hall.

‘How do you do, sir?’ he said in English, extending a hand. ‘Pierre Gossard. Would you like to come through?’

Ned found himself in an expensively furnished office whose main features were a Louis Quinze desk and two matching chairs. Gossard sat down behind the desk and pointed to one of the chairs.

‘Just one or two formalities,’ he said, tapping into the keyboard of a desktop computer which was perched incongruously on the heavily ornamented desk. ‘Perhaps you would be good enough to write for me the opening password phrase?’

He passed over a compliment slip and Ned wrote down ‘Simon Says’ and handed the slip across the desk to Gossard who glanced at it briefly, looked at his computer screen and nodded. He passed the paper back to Ned.

‘And the secondary phrase?’

Ned wrote ‘This is a stick-up’ and passed it over again. Gossard smiled thinly and pushed the compliment slip into a small metal box.

‘Security paper,’ he explained. ‘It is no more. Well, everything seems to be satisfactory, my dear sir. How may I help you?’

‘Well, firstly I’d like to know how much is in my account.’

‘Mm-hm ...‘ Gossard typed at the computer. ‘You understand that since the account is linked to leading share indices on the European bourses I can only give you the balance as from close of trading on Friday. Quite a substantial sum has accrued over the past thirty years.’

Ned nodded as if talk of share indices, bourses and substantial sums was a matter of everyday conversation to him. Gossard wrote a figure down on a fresh compliment slip and handed it to Ned who looked down.

‘That’s in Swiss Francs?’ he said gulping slightly.

‘Just so,’ said Gossard.

Ned swallowed again and did a rapid calculation in his head. Roughly two and half francs to a pound. Good heavens.

‘As for what I would like to do with the account,’ he said as naturally as he could manage. ‘I should like a little time to think. Perhaps we can meet again on Friday? You don’t need anything else from me, I take it?’

‘No indeed, sir. Since your account is as old as it is, it does not fall under new disclosure rules. But it is not old enough to qualify for inspection under the recent Jewish reparation schemes.’

‘Excellent,’ said Ned. ‘Friday morning, eleven o’clock?’

‘I shall look forward to seeing you, sir.

Ned was still trembling when he reached his suite at the Hotel D’Angleterre. He sat on the balcony sipping coffee and looking out over the lake. He watched a rainbow shimmering in the spray of the fountain.

Staring into the rainbow, Ned wept.

‘Oh, Babe. Why aren’t you here with me?’

He looked down at a hotel notepad on which he had jotted a set of numbers.

‘It is indeed a substantial sum,’ he whispered to himself, the tears dropping down onto the paper. ‘Even with the price of a cup of coffee being what it is today, three hundred and twenty-four million pounds is still a substantial sum. Oh, Babe, there is such a thing as Justice. Truly there is.

?Thoroughly Thought Through

IV

Simon Cotter arrived in England by private plane in the autumn of 1999. His reputation for financial adventuring preceded him.

There was not an. ambitious young person in Europe who did not want to catch the attention of this remarkable bucca?neer. No one rode the dot.com bubble harder, funding young, energetic and ambitious dreamers whose ventures, when floated on the European technology exchanges, made opening valuations that caused the eyes of seasoned traders to pop. Some said that the swollen, iridescent membrane of e-commerce would soon burst, but for the moment no one was soaring higher than Simon Cotter of CotterDotCom. The doomsayers insisted that the balloon was given its stratospheric lift by hot air and that the world was growing giddy with altitude sickness. The faithful maintained that the venture was fired by a true spirit of innovation and enter?prise and would last beyond the lifetime of the sceptics.

Cotter was not yet forty, but the gossip had it that he owned twenty-five million for every year of his life. A website tracked his estimated fortune against the fluctuation of the markets, one day in October it showed him earning four million pounds sterling in just eight hours of trading. The Man of the Millennium had arrived and, to the excitement of the British press, he was about to make his home in England, the land — some claimed — of his birth.

He was unmarried and said to exude a magnetic appeal that had men and women alike gasping and moaning with admiration. Cynics asserted that a dead sea-slug with that kind of money and power would radiate charisma and sex-appeal. That isn’t necessarily so, it was pointed out to them — look at Bill Gates. Not all that is gold, glitters.

That no one knew where Simon Cotter had come from with such indecent speed added greatly to his mystery. One moment the world was Cotter free, the next he was bigger than Harry Potter. Poems were written on that very subject, taking advantage of the happy accident of the rhyme.

The man was rumoured to be able to speak nine languages and play an unbeatable game of backgammon. The French believed that he was French, but the Germans, Italians and Austrians also claimed him for their own. The Swiss pointed to his head offices outside Geneva, not five kilometres from where the World Wide Web itself had been devised and declared Cotter to be Swisser than a yodel. Others tapped the sides of their noses and whispered gravely about the Russian mafia, Colombian cartels and other dark and dangerous corners of the world. Geneva might be the birthplace of the World Wide Web, they said, but it was also the world’s financial laundromat. Where there’s brass, there’s muck, they said. It can’t last, they said. It’s brightest just before the dusk, they said. Wiser heads were silent and disdained to take any notice of the mutter in the gutter. Talk it was that pushed prices up and talk that pulled them down again. Any fool could talk. Prattle and tattle were cheap and getting cheaper. What was this telephony revolution, with its faxes, pagers, cellular and satellite phones, email, intranets and real-time video-conferencing but a cheap and faster way to chatter and gossip and jabber? If it was more than that, then it could keep for the moment. Give us time to think, they said. We who wait on the platform may arrive later than those that jump aboard the speeding train, but we’ve a better chance of a good seat and a restful journey. We get there in the end, sounder in wind and limb. Only bandwagons are to be jumped upon, and bandwagons always crash at the first dangerous corner.

Cotter too kept his own counsel. His spokesmen would announce with great puff and pizzazz the latest bright young venture that CDC was funding and he might from time to time attend the launch of a favoured new dot.com enterprise in person, but the Robespierre of the Digital Revolution himself gave no interviews and threw out no theories for the world to chew over and tear apart. With his dark hair, his beard and the sunglasses that never left his face, the press had other nicknames for him too. The CyberSaviour they called him and the Jesus of Cool.

When he did, uncharacteristically, reveal to a London financial journalist at one of his company launches in Lausanne that he would soon be coming home, England sighed with pleasure and pride. He was immediately offered tickets to the Dome for Millennial Eve, the membership of four clubs, accounts with a dozen tailors and the opportunity to be interviewed on Channel Four by Chris Evans. This last offer he turned down.

‘I’m really so uninteresting,’ he emailed to the producer. ‘You’d be much better off with somebody else. Believe me, I’d only bore you.’

He was not believed and the crush of press waiting to meet him at Heathrow would have gratified a pop star.

Amongst the Britons who watched the footage and listened to the comment and analysis that spilled out in the media over the next few weeks were many who sat down immediately to compose letters to him, explaining their ideas for world-beating new internet sites or simply begging for money, employment or a charitable donation.

The reactions of three different individuals are of particular interest, however.

Ashley Barson-Garland MP, QC, had recently won the curious Commons lottery that gives the right to backbenchers to try and push their own Private Member’s Bill through parliament. Barson-Garland had been very keen to sponsor new legislation that would prove his party’s commitment to the family. He knew that in the next election, whenever it came, each party would attempt to represent itself as the true champion of Family Values. He believed that, since his party was almost certain to lose that election, he could do himself a great deal of good by making a name for himself as the Tories’ most prominent spokesman for the Family Agenda. When the dust of defeat had settled and the present leader had gone, as go he must, the Tories would look to someone like Ashley to lead them to victory in 2005, which he had for so long marked down as the year that would see him installed in Downing Street.

The Bill he had drafted called for the strictest laws yet on the control of the internet. All British Service Providers would be held accountable in law for any unseemly traffic that passed through their pipelines. Barson-Garland called for an all-embracing firewall to be built around the island to keep the British family safe from the ‘tide of filth’ that threatened to ‘engulf’ the ‘young and vulnerable’ and other ‘at-risk members of the community’. (He had long ago overcome any scruples about using clichés. They worked. For some extraordinary reason, they worked and only a fool would consider himself above their use.) Under the terms of his proposed Internet Service Providers Act, an independent agency would be set up arid given the right to sweep all email randomly, much as police had the right to point speedguns at road traffic. Anyone who opposed such legislation might regard themselves as a friend of liberty, but Barson-Garland would demonstrate that in reality they were nothing less than enemies of the Family. Only those with suspect agendas or something to hide could possibly object to the purification of cyberspace. Ordinary, decent, law-abiding citizens would welcome such a move.

He did not expect his Bill to be passed into law, Private Members’ Bills almost always failed, but it was a way to plant a (patriotic) flag in the territory of family and to ‘force the agenda’. The Labour government already attempted to prove its family credentials by talking of family tax credits, child income allowances and other mechanisms that provoked yawns even from those who benefited directly from them. With his Bill, Barson-?Garland had staked a claim that would force New Labour to play or pay. If they opposed him, he could make great political capital of their folly.

The middle-class tabloids were already on his side. Ashley Barson-Garland’s Great National Firewall appealed to the ‘instincts’ (as they preferred to call bigotry and prejudice) of the ‘vast majority’ who worried about ‘bogus’ asylum-seekers and ‘rampant’ Euro federalism. What was the internet after all, but backdoor cultural immigration of the most pernicious kind? Children (children for heaven’s sake!) were at the mercy of homosexual propagandists, anti-capitalist rioters, drug dealers and perverts. Thank God a man like Ashley Barson-Garland was standing up to all this. His Internet Service Providers Bill, all in all, ‘pressed the right buttons’ and ‘sent the right signals’.

This evening, this hero of ordinary decent law-abiding citizens was watching a BBC special on the ‘Dot Coin Phenomenon’ chiefly in order to see how much of what he had said in an interview to the producers of the programme had been cut, mangled in meaning or entirely omitted. When footage of Simon Cotter appeared he laughed contemptuously at the accompanying hyperbolic journalese, but his ears pricked up at the reports that Cotter was coming home to England. He opened his laptop, keyed in his password and made an instant note in his journal.

Like Winston Churchill, I find that sometimes it is enough just to read or hear ‘patriotism’ ‘England’ or ‘home’ for tears to spring to my eyes. I believe that ‘senile lability’ is the phrase for it. In my case it seems to have come early. What a turnaround ... as a teenager, my prick used to twitch and leak at the mere sight of words like ‘youth’ and ‘boy’. In middle age ‘family’, ‘hearth’ and ‘country’ are the words that jump from the page and it is my eyes that do the twitching and leaking. Different symptoms of the same sickness, no doubt...

This Simon Cotter interests me. He has not nailed his colours to the mast. He thrives on enterprise and must perforce be a natural Tory, for all his hippy-happy appearance. Now that the glamour of New Labour is wearing thin he must be caught and cultivated. It is probable that he will instinctively see my bill as a threat. If I ask to see him however ... suggest that I value his input, am anxious to consult all interested parties, canvas all views, hear all opinions, weigh all options, include not exclude, etc. etc., he may be flattered into some sort of co?operation. What a catch he would be

Ashley closed the lid and looked up at the television screen once more. His Private Member’s Bill was being discussed. Some lank-haired millionaire yob in a tee-shirt was accusing Barson-Garland of trying to create a sterilised intranet that would cut Britain off from the rest of the world.

‘Cyberspace is like a giant city,’ the scrofulous oaf insisted in vowels that made Ashley wince and an intonation that rose at the end of every sentence as if everything this poltroon said were a question. ‘Along with the shopping centres, galleries, museums and libraries, it’s got its slums and red-light districts. Sure. That’s true in Amsterdam, New York, Paris, Berlin and London. It’s not true in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia or Montgomery, Alabama. Where would we rather live, London or Riyadh? Amsterdam or Alabama? Think about it, yeah? Wherever there’s freedom, you’ll find sex, drugs and rock and roll. The internet’s no different.’

Ashley snorted with derision. ‘And wherever there are sex, drugs and rock and roll,’ he said, ‘you will find desolated communities, dysfunctional families and moral wastelands befouled by gibbering nonentities like you.’

He was pleased with that and added it to his diary entry for the day.

Rufus Cade let himself into the flat and flopped onto a sofa.

‘I’m getting too fucking old for this,’ he told himself with a heavy sigh.

He could see the answering machine light flashing and ignored it. Probably Jo, Jane or Julie moaning about money. Why couldn’t he have married a girl whose name didn’t begin with a J? Just for once in his life at least. Given it a try. Lucy at the office, she was a good girl. A good girl and a damned good shag and all. Zoë too. And Dawn. They didn’t threaten him with court orders and solicitor’s letters. They called him ‘Roofy’ and teased him about his weight. In his next life he’d run a mile before speaking to any Js. Whining bitches the lot of them. School fees, health insurance, holidays. Every child, he thought furiously as he tapped out the last of his coke onto the glass-topped coffee table, every last sodding child has to have work done on their fucking teeth. Some bastard in Soho has decided that braces are now cool and there isn’t a teenager in the land without expensive multi-coloured metalwork wired across their front fucking snappers. Bollocks to the lot of them.

He picked up a newspaper. A new-laid pubescent dot.com millionaire grinned out from the front page, acne flaring.

‘Cunts,’ muttered Rufus. ‘How the fuck do they do it?’ Rufus had sent Michael Jackson, Madonna, Marilyn Monroe and the Prince of Wales to the launch of another new e-commerce company (e-tailers they called them?selves now, ho, fucking ho) at the Business Design Centre just the week before. For some reason the people behind the launch — CotterDotCom, who bloody else? — had asked Rufus to turn up too, which had annoyed and puzzled him. He had better things to do than watch Madonna spilling wine and Michael Jackson having his hair pulled by drunken journalists. Why the hell did they want him there? He could hardly argue with them. Who pays the piper calls the tune and all that, and CDC paid better than anyone. Most people thought his agency was already over the hill (too eighties, sweetie, so vieux chapeau) which meant that the imprimatur of a hot shop like CDC took on special value. Rufus would have jumped naked through fiery hoops if they’d demanded it.

He had stood like a fat lemon watching his models move around the room with drinks and canapés. He listened to a presentation that bored and irritated him and he got drunk. Mind you, he did score, so it wasn’t entirely a wasted morning. Come to think of it, he reminded himself, checking his watch, John should be here soon.

Weirdest thing. Just coming out of the cubicle after a nice toot and there’s this big fat old guy combing his hair in the mirror.

—Got some more if you want it.

—More what? Unlikely he would be law, but better safe than sorry.

—If you’re not interested, no worries. Very pure, very cheap. Try a line.

The guy hands me a wrap, just like that. Incredible. And fuck me, was it ever wild gear. Whooh! Nearly blows my fucking head off.

—How much? I ask, coming back out of the crapper, eyes watering, heart pumping like a locomotive.

—Fifty a gram.

Fifty. I mean, what? It was sixty fifteen years ago. Fifty. There’s got to be a catch.

—Come on, man. What’s the catch?

—Need you to take an ounce at a time. Got to get it off my hands.

—Look, I don’t have much cash on me at the moment.

—Got a card?

—You’re kidding. Thought for a second he meant a credit card. Oh, right. I give him my business card.

—Faces? What’s that then?

—Model agency, the waiting staff out there. They’re mine.

—The look-alikes?

—We call them featured stand-ins in the business.

—Yeah, right. Look-alikes. And there’s me thinking that really was Prince Charles. The name’s John. Give us a call.

And off he goes, leaving me with over two grams in the wrap which he doesn’t even ask for back. Don’t remember much more of that day, I can tell you. And next day a whole ounce for only five hundred and fifty quid. That soon went, twenty-eight grams in five days. Thirty grams if you include the initial freebie. You’re burning the candle at both ends and the middle, Rufus.

The door-bell chimed and he got up from the sofa and went over to the entry-phone.

‘John.’

‘Oh hi. Come on up.

By the time John had got to the top of the stairs his face was streaked in sweat and he was wheezing like a perished accordion.

‘Christ,’ he gasped. ‘Haven’t you heard of lifts?’

‘Mm, sorry about that, mate.’

The flat was on the second floor but even Rufus, flabby, overweight and unfit as he was, could usually manage it without heaving and panting like a dying walrus.

‘Get you a voddie?’

‘Nah, I’m driving.’

Rufus poured one for himself and watched, out of the corner of his eye, as John took a baggie from his pocket and dropped it on the coffee table.

‘Chop one for yourself,’ said Rufus.

‘I’ll love you and leave you, mate.’

Oh, such bliss. So many dealers liked to hang around. Worse still, so many stayed at home and forced you to visit. It was the part of drug life that Rufus most hated. The enforced pretence of matiness. If you want a pork chop, all you have to do is go into a butcher’s shop, he reasoned. You order and walk out with the fucking thing in a bag. No chit-chat, no shit. No ‘cheers mate’. Visit a dealer for a supply of charlie on the other hand, and you’re in for an hour of droning views on music, sport, politics, genetically modified crops and the evils of the World Bank. A sensitive social dance had to be danced, to show that you didn’t think of the guy as a servant or social inferior. You had to pretend that the whole transaction had something to do with friendship and mutual studenty Bohemian cool. It was a relief that he got none of that bullshit from John.

Still, he thought, it would be nice to see him take a line just once. Just to show that he did. Dealers who didn’t use always made Rufus nervous and guilty.

‘Can I ask you something?’ John said as he stood in the doorway, ready to leave. He looked a little nervous.

‘Sure. Ask away.

‘You don’t fancy coming in with me on something bigger, do you?’

‘Bigger?’

‘It’s my brother, see. He keeled over with a heart attack a couple of weeks ago ...

‘Oh, bummer,’ Rufus said. ‘I am sorry.’ And you’ll soon be following him, he added to himself. Not so much a gene pool, more a lard pool.

‘No, it’s not that. He was a streak of fucking piss as it goes. Couldn’t stand the sight of him. Only, fact is, he didn’t have no family besides me and I’ve inherited five kilos of his bleeding gear and I don’t know how to shift it. Found it in a cupboard when I was clearing his flat out.’

‘John, I’d love it. Believe me, I’d love it, it’s great gear but I don’t deal. I wouldn’t know where to begin.'

‘No, what I’m saying is that I heard tell of some guys up in Stoke Newington who might be in the market. Turkish boys. Thought you could come up with me and help push it through. I’d go sixty-forty with you.’

‘If you already know who these people are, why do you need me?’

‘Well, I don’t want to get ripped off. You, you’re a businessman, you’ve got the public school accent and all that, touch of class. They wouldn’t dare do the dirty on someone like you. Someone like me, they’d probably just take the stuff and dump me in an alley, you know what I mean?’

‘Sixty—forty?’

‘Yeah. Reckon that’s fair.’

Rufus did some reckoning of his own. A kilo is a thousand grams. Fifty thousand quid. Five fives are twenty-five, so that’s a quarter of a million. Forty percent of quarter a million is ... one hundred thousand. A hundred grand. A hundred grand.

‘You’re on,’ he said. ‘What kind of people are they?’

‘Well, they’re not boy scouts. They’re drug dealers, aren’t they? But business is business, I reckon. How’s Thursday night for you? I’ll give ‘em a bell and set it up. I can come and pick you up and we’ll drive there together.’

They shook on the deal and, as John waddled slowly down the stairs, Rufus sat down on the sofa and breathed out long and slow. A hundred grand. A hundred fucking grand.

With a hundred grand he could set up an international agency on the web. Look-alikes, singing telegrams, party events. He could have girls and boys across the globe, hired electronically. They would pay a registration fee, he would get them work. With his hundred grand he could design a ritzy pitch, artwork, dummy website, financial projections — the works. He’d take it to CotterDotCom and blow their minds with it. Might even get to meet the great Messiah himself.

Rufus dipped the corner of a credit card into the bag and dug out the biggest bump he’d ever sniffed in his life.

Breakfast time at the Fendemans’ was a confused affair that transcended age and gender expectations. Gordon ate nothing, but tried a different coffee or tea every day, Portia tucked into bacon, sausages and eggs and Albert, on the rare occasions he breakfasted at all, would eat nothing more than a slice of toast.

There were reasons for this. Albert rarely had appetite in the mornings. Anything that took him from his room and his computers he considered a waste of time. He had once spilled a cup of coffee over a USB hub and on another occasion the entire contents of a glass of orange juice had destroyed a printer. Portia, on the other hand, had discovered a new high protein diet. It was a regime that involved such a low intake of carbohydrates that she would check her urine each day with diabetic testing sticks to see how many ketones her body was leaking, much to the affectionate derision of her family. Gordon sampled different teas and coffees every day because tea and coffee constituted his trade. He usually spat the coffee out because he had inherited his father’s weak heart and the specialist disapproved of him ingesting caffeine. Java the cat ate whatever was going, but preferred pilchards in tomato sauce because he was peculiar.

On this particular morning however, Gordon was making a terrific mess in the kitchen because he had decided to experiment with cocoa. The fine powder was being transferred from surface to surface and from finger?tips to finger-tips, which was causing panic.

‘Where’s my carbohydrate counter?’ Portia wailed.

‘Dad this stuff is getting everywhere,’ complained Albert, coming into the kitchen and spreading his hands out in front of Gordon’s face. ‘Look at it. The more you try and dust it away, the more it gets ingrained into everything. I’ve got cocoa on my keyboard, cocoa on my screen and cocoa on my mouse.

‘Good lyrics,’ said Gordon, approvingly. ‘Come on, kiddo, it’s only powder. Try this mocha, it’s not bad.’

‘Nineteen grams per hundred!’ gasped Portia. ‘I don’t believe it.’

‘No, hon,’ said Gordon, peering over her shoulder and dripping mocha coffee onto the pages of her book. ‘Those figures are for sweetened cocoa. Unsweetened is only three grams, see?’

‘All the same,’ said Portia crossly, pulling the book away from the drips, ‘you might be more careful.’

‘If you’ve ingested one hundredth of a milligram, I’d be amazed,’ said Gordon. ‘So, child of mine,’ he turned to Albert, who was assiduously scrubbing his hands under the sink. ‘How many hits yesterday?’

‘A new record. Three hundred and twenty-eight. From seven different countries. Not bad, huh?’

‘Not bad,’ conceded Gordon.

‘If only half of them, a quarter even, had placed orders, imagine how much that would be.’

‘We’re doing fine, Albie.’

‘I’m getting emails all the time asking if we sell direct. Every time I have to say no, I feel like we’re losing business.'

‘Selling to the public is a nightmare,’ said Gordon. ‘We’ve got all the supermarkets, let them do the work.’

‘Yeah but Dad, you’ve seen where they stack them. The lowest shelves, no special offers, no targeted advertising, no loyalty tie-ins, nothing.’

Portia went out to the hall to retrieve the newspapers and the post. This was an argument that she had heard a hundred times, ever since Gordon had first employed Albert to create his company website. She believed, with a wife and mother’s loyalty, that they were both right. Maybe the business should embrace e-commerce, as Albert thought. But maybe Gordon had a point too when he argued against the trouble and expense of guaranteeing secure transactions on the net and the added burden of costs that accrued with advertising, shipping and the extra staff who would have to be hired to handle the whole enterprise.

Café Ethica, founded by Gordon five years ago with money inherited from Portia’s mother Hillary, had become an enormous success. Gordon was the hero of students, eco-warriors, anti-capitalists and self-styled protectors of the third-world. Ethical Trading was the new big thing and Gordon’s courage in leaving his well-paid job as a successful commodity broker and striking out on his own, dealing direct with peasant farmers and co-operatives from the world’s poorest and most abjectly dependent cash-crop countries had transformed him into one of the country’s favourite businessmen. He had appeared on Question Time and Newsnight and, if he were to become a full British subject, many believed that he would be in line for a knighthood. Portia stayed out of the business and continued to plough her own furrow in academia. Albert had once offered to write web pages for her too, but she had gracefully declined. She found it hard to believe that a site devoted to Sienese tempera would be of much service either to her or to her students.

‘Pornography and a letter for you,’ she said now to her son, returning with the post. ‘Bills of course for us.

Pornography was Portia’s name for Albert’s preferred reading matter. Almost every day a different computer or web publishing magazine would hit the doormat and he would disappear with it into his bedroom, emerging several hours later with flushed cheeks and a faraway look in his eyes. If only the magazines really were pornography, she sometimes thought, wistfully. At least sex was something that she understood. The free CDs that came with the magazines filled the house. Portia, who liked to turn her hand to anything artistic to remind herself that she wasn’t just a dry professor and writer of obscure and expensive books, had created a number of amusing installations from them. There was a table whose top was constructed of nothing but America On Line give?away disks, sealed in with perspex. There were silvery mobiles and sculptures all over the house. On her desk she had a number of stacks all glued together which she used as pen holders. In the kitchen they did service as coasters and place mats.

Albert, standing by the toaster, gave a gasp when he opened his single letter.

‘I don’t fucking believe it,’ he said, passing it to Gordon. ‘No, hang on. You don’t touch it till you’ve washed your hands. You read it first, Mum.’

Portia took the letter and held it to the window behind the sink. Presbyopia had come early to her. Too many slide shows and too much poring over too many documents in too many dark Tuscan libraries.

The letter was printed on expensive company stationery.

?CotterDotCom

Dear Mr Fendeman,

Your name has come to our attention as the author and webmaster of The Café Ethica website. As you may know, our company has already acquired a unique name for excellence and innovation in the expanding world of electronic commerce. However, we are constantly looking for bright, imaginative and creative personnel to join us in our mission to continue to forge new businesses on the leading edge of the digital revolution. We believe that you may be just the kind of person we need.

If you are interested in visiting our London offices to discuss helping to set up and lead a new Ethical Trading Division, we would be delighted to talk to you about an employment package which we believe includes the most competitive share options, private health insurance, pension and bonus schemes in the field.

Your confidentiality in this matter would be appreciated.

Yours sincerely

Simon Cotter

Gordon took the letter from Portia.

‘It’s got to be a hoax,’ he said. ‘I mean, with the best will in the world, Albie, someone is pulling your bloody leg.’

‘We’ll see,’ said Albert snatching the letter from his father’s sudsy hands and going over to the telephone.

‘But darling,’ cried Portia. ‘What about Oxford?’ Albert was too busy dialling to pay any attention. They stood and watched as he talked nervously into the telephone. At one point he stood up straighter and Portia noticed that he was blushing slightly.

‘Three o’clock?’ he said. ‘Absolutely. No problem. Three o’clock. I’ll be there. Of course. Absolutely.’

He hung up, a dazed and ecstatic look on his face.

‘Well?’

‘I spoke to him! I actually spoke to him.’

‘You aren’t going to see him?’

‘Are you insane?’ Albert gave his mother a look of amazed disbelief. ‘Of course I’m going to see him! You heard. Three o’clock this afternoon. In his office.’

‘But you will tell him that you’re going to Oxford next October, won’t you? You will make it clear that you can’t even think of long term employment for at least three years.

‘Bugger Oxford. I’ve just spoken to Simon Cotter, Mum. Simon Cotter.’

‘And who’s he? Mother Theresa and Albert Schweitzer all rolled into one? Your education comes first.’

‘This will be my education.’

‘Has he any idea how young you are?’

‘Mum, there are people at CDC still awaiting their second set of teeth. There are millionaires working for Cotter with undescended testicles and training bras.’

‘Well that sounds encouraging, I must say. ‘You know what I mean. I wouldn’t be the youngest person there by a long way.

‘Gordon, tell him.’

Gordon had taken the letter back. Portia felt a wave of something coming from her husband that disturbed her.

Was it irritation? Not envy surely? She was shocked to realise, once the thought had flashed across her mind, that there could be no doubt of it. It was envy. Something in the way his tongue flicked over his lips and his eyes darted so quickly over the letter, as if still looking for proof that it was a hoax, told her that he was, beyond question, jealous of his own son. He was annoyed, he was resentful, he was angry. No one but Portia could have detected it, but it made her stomach turn over to see it.

‘Well now,’ said Gordon, assuming the measured tones of a wise and objective man of the world. ‘If you do go and see him, you make damned sure you don’t agree to anything — anything, without talking it through with us first. If there’s a contract we’ll make sure the company lawyers see it before you even think of signing. These people can be very convincing, very plausible but none the less...’

‘Sure Dad, sure. Jesus!’ Albert flashed a smile at both his parents and skipped from the room, a slice of toast between his teeth.

Oliver Delft hated politicians. Most people profess a dislike that springs from distaste at what they perceive as the hypocrisy, double-dealing and populist vulgarity of the breed. Delft disliked them for almost opposite reasons. It was their grindingly slow moral probity and obsession with ‘accountability’ that maddened him. Accountability in a double sense. Their pettifogging fixation with audits, financial openness and Treasury Rules was as numbingly odious to him as their perpetual nervous glances over the shoulder towards Commons Ethical Committees, “best practice guidelines” and investigative journalists. If a thing was to be done, then surely it should be done without qualms and scruples. Wavering and havering about morality was almost always, in Oliver’s view, the least moral option. He had warned them about Kosovo, Chechnya, Nigeria, East Timor, Zimbabwe, Myanmar —he could name a dozen little local cancers that could have benefited from the quick kindness of invasive surgery but had instead swollen and flourished in the name of ‘ethical foreign policy’ or ‘constructive engagement’ — the politicians had failed to listen and paid the price.

The secret world’s big secret was that it made a profit. This simple and surprising truth had saved Delft’s depart?ment from even more ministerial interference than he already suffered. Secrets made money and Britain (especi?ally now that there were no ideological factors to complicate the world and make martyrs and traitors out of intellectuals and fanatics) retained a healthy balance of payments surplus with the rest of the world when it came to her trade in the dark arts. So long as those figures stayed on the right side of the ledger, ministers could be relied upon to allow Delft a freer hand than that enjoyed by any of his successors since the Second World War. Never?theless, as far as Oliver was concerned, any interference was too much. It is a melancholy fact that shareholders in a company that makes a fat profit are greedier in chasing down every penny than shareholders in a company that breaks even or reports a small loss. Delft had siphoned off over the years enough to guarantee him an opulent retirement, but there was always room for more. For the moment however, his rectitude was beyond question. Every pony for his daughters and every necklace for his wife was bought with honest money from his meagre public salary and dwindling inheritance. That he had made provision for a better life in the future, no one could possibly guess. He was covered. In the meantime however, his surface life continued on its dull and grinding course. Today, for example, was a day of meetings.

He weathered the fortnightly RAM committee with his usual show of patience. The Resource Allocation Module had been the bright idea of a twenty-three-year-old wunderkind from Treasury and Oliver’s private contempt for the fashionable accountancy mechanisms dreamt up by such weird creatures knew no bounds. Old-fashioned double-entry book-keeping with quill and feint-margined foolscap was more secure and less easily manipulated. The RAM, however, used the latest ‘input engines’ and ‘nominal ledgering’ to model the department’s financial behaviour and (more importantly) it boasted its own logo, departmental colour-coding and screensaver. This made it the darling of ministers and entirely proof of criticism.

In a moment of weakness, Oliver had agreed to lunch with Ashley Barson-Garland to talk about his wretched Private Member’s Bill. They met at Mark’s Club in Mayfair. The good taste of the décor and the discreet expertise of the staff (‘Good afternoon, Sir Oliver.’ How the hell did they know his name? He needed people like that on his payroll) settled him into a better mood and by the time he had absorbed the menu he was ready to enjoy himself despite the prospect of political company.

Ashley arrived at the upstairs bar two minutes late and spent more than five minutes apologising in what Oliver guessed with a revolted shudder was supposed to be a charming and self-deprecating manner.

Oliver found it reassuring to remind himself that he was actually some six or seven years older than the balding, jowly and unappetising creature blathering beside him. Oliver’s secret vice was vanity. He had an interest in skin-care and male cosmetics that only his wife was aware of and no colleague or underling would ever have guessed at. Pomposity, ambition and bad soap had written themselves indelibly across Ashley’s features, Oliver noticed, much as gin and tropical sun used to print themselves on the com?plexion in the grand old days of Empire. A course of humectants, exfoliating creams and cell refreshant night masks would go some way to improving general skin tone, but very little could be done to help the folds of double chin and the dull glaze over the eyes. Perhaps these are nature’s way of warning us off, he thought.

‘I see they’ve shown you a menu,’ Barson-Garland said, when the tiresome story of his taxi ride from Westminster to Charles Street had finally wound to an end. ‘As to wines. Shall we go Burgundian? What do you think? There’s a mighty Corton Charlemagne to begin with and I happen to know they have recently added a La Tache that it would surely be madness to pass over.

Oliver was well aware that the only La Tache on the list cost over four hundred pounds a bottle. He suspected that Barson-Garland knew that Oliver would know this. Hum, he thought to himself. Trying to impress me, are you? Trying to soften me up? You in your Old Harrovian tie and Christ Church cufflinks. Jesus God, what kind of man wears college cufflinks?

They moved downstairs from the bar to the dining room. Barson-Garland had ordered a boiled egg crammed with Beluga caviar which he ate with repulsive elegance as he talked.

‘Let me first of all assure you that I am not here to enlist your support for my Bill,’ he said. ‘That would be quite improper. Quite improper. However, as you may be aware, there remains a certain level of confusion about the implications of my proposals both within and without the House. There are those who cast doubt on the Bill’s technical, legal and practical feasibility. It depends, as you know, upon the creation of a new body, something akin to America’s National Security Agency. Our own GCHQ won’t quite answer. I’m sure you agree with me there.’

Oliver moved his head in a manner that might have been interpreted as a nod.

‘Quite so. My proposed agency would have con?siderable, even awe-inspiring powers. We already have satellites that scan the surface of our world, but I am suggesting an electronic capability that would allow us to scan, as it were, beneath the surface. We have the macrocosm, let us help ourselves to the microcosm. There are those who fear that I am taking, as the Guardian put it only this morning, one hell of a civil liberty.’

Oliver made another non-committal movement of the head. A nauseating vision arose in his head of Barson?-Garland pasting his press reviews into an album and sending them to his mother.

‘It seems to me,’ Ashley went on, delicately pressing at the corners of his mouth with a napkin, ‘that I need a trusted figure, someone of irreproachable integrity and proven expertise in the field of security, who is willing to shoulder the responsibility of building such an agency from the ground up. If it were known in the right quarters that a man of the reputation of Sir Oliver Delft might be prepared to take the job on...’ Barson-Garland took a prim sip of wine and let the thought hang.

‘I have not heard anything,’ Oliver said, ‘that leads me to believe that your Bill will meet with success.

‘Naturally not. The Bill will fail. That is axiomatic. We take it as read and move on. The issue will have been laid out, you see. That is the point. The possibility of government having such power within its grasp will have been propounded. The genie, as it were, will be out of the bottle. Such tedious niceties as open debate will have to, ah, take a powder.’

‘I hate to remind you of this, B-G, but you are not in government. You are in opposition.’

‘Oh, as to that,’ Ashley waved his hand, ‘while a week may be a long time in politics, a decade is but a passing breath. The Blessed Margaret already feels like a distant dream, does she not? His Toniness too will disappear into the vacuum history in a twinkling. I am sure you agree with me that it is in the interests of your service to take a longer, more strategic view. My suggestion is that you and I develop an informal relationship. Consider it as a wager on the future. I have no doubt that you have cultivated unpleasantly ambitious politicians like myself before now. You see? I have at least the virtue of self-knowledge.’

‘If I were to suggest to my masters that I do favour the idea of an agency along the lines you have proposed, how would that benefit you?’

‘It would benefit the country,’ said Ashley. ‘That may sound sententious, but I happen to believe it to be true. It would also establish my credentials in the field. Opposition provides few opportunities to do more than talk. The popularity of my bill amongst some journalists and much of the public is one thing, but I need to demonstrate to my party that I am capable of treading my way around the dark and slippery corridors that people like you inhabit without coming an arser. You follow?’

‘Mm,’ said Oliver. ‘I think I do.’ Barson-Garland put him in mind of those poison toads whose heads were said to contain jewels. Ugly and dangerous, to be sure, but offering the possibility of great riches none the less if handled properly.

‘There is nothing unethical about mutual advantage,’ said Ashley, as if reading his thoughts. ‘Quite the reverse, I should say.

‘Do you remember when we first met?’ Oliver asked.

Ashley seemed a little taken aback by the question. ‘Well now, let me see,’ he said, twisting the stem of his wine glass and screwing up his piggy eyes. ‘I pride myself on a fair memory. I fancy it may have been at the Telegraph Christmas party in Brooks’s club. December nineteen eighty—nine.’

‘No, no,’ said Oliver. ‘We met many years before that. You were still a schoolboy.’

A terrible image arose in Ashley’s mind of furtive liaisons in Manchester public lavatories long ago. ‘Really?’ he said with a ghastly attempt at a smile. ‘I’m not sure I quite understand. When and where might that have been?’

The dark crimson flooding Ashley’s face and the flash of fear leaping into his eyes had not escaped Oliver’s attention. ‘Catherine Street,’ he said, watching carefully. ‘You were working for Charles Maddstone. Private secretary, personal assistant, something like that.’

‘Good Lord,’ said Ashley. ‘How clever of you to remember!’

Oliver noted the instant look of relief that replaced Ashley’s initial expression of terror and wished, not for the first time, that he had the power of a J. Edgar Hoover to look more deeply into the lives of his political masters. It seemed that some dark secret lurked in Barson-Garland’s childhood. Oliver wondered if he came from a background that shamed him. Those plummy patrician tones and fifteen hundred pound Savile Row pin stripes were clearly too good to be true. Of course, with a free and unfettered press the resources of an intelligence service were hardly needed. The further Barson-Garland advanced in his career the more the media would uncover for themselves.

‘I am desolated that I do not recall the meeting,’ Ashley said. ‘Sir Charles had many political contacts of course, and I was young and inexperienced ... wait a moment!’ Ashley stared at Oliver as the truth dawned. ‘I’ve got you now. You’re Smith! Good God! Smith, you called yourself. Smith! Young as I was I never for a minute believed it was your real name, even then. I’m right, aren’t I? You were Smith.’

Delft inclined his head. ‘The same.’

‘Dear me,’ said Ashley. ‘There’s an odd thing. And what a bad business that was. I don’t believe I’ve thought about it for the past — what — fifteen years? More perhaps. There wasn’t anything...’ he lowered his voice. ‘There’s nothing you can tell me about l’affaire Maddstone that didn’t make the public domain, is there?’

Oliver shrugged. ‘I dare say a river will be dredged one fine day and a skull dug up.’

Ashley nodded wisely. ‘Poor old Ned.’

Their main courses were set down in front of them and the sommelier approached to offer Ashley a taste of the La Tache.

‘The law is profitable, it would seem,’ Oliver remarked dryly. ‘This poor public servant thanks you for such a heady glimpse of the high life.’

Ashley smiled. ‘Tush,’ he said. ‘When it comes to spending money, I am a poor amateur. My wine merchant let slip last week that Simon Cotter has recently given him carte blanche to create the finest cellar in Europe. He has already spent over a million.’

‘Lordy,’ murmured Oliver.

‘That’s not the most amazing part of it. The man has never been seen drinking anything other than milk.’

‘Milk?’

‘Milk,’ said Ashley. ‘As a matter of fact, I am to be granted an audience with him tomorrow. If he offers me milk I think I may scream and go into spasm.

‘He has need of a lawyer?’

‘No, no. I’m sounding him out. His political affiliations are unknown. In fact,’ continued Ashley with a meaning look, ‘his whole life seems to be shrouded in mystery.’

‘I can’t help you there, I’m afraid,’ Oliver said, rightly interpreting the look as a plea for information. ‘We don’t have so much as his date of birth on file.’

‘Ah, you’ve looked then?’

‘Naturally we’ve looked. We know as much about him as you do. If anything comes up of course ...

Oliver was prepared to let Ashley believe that the intelligence services were at his disposal. It was, after all, perfectly possible that the Conservatives were just insane enough to elect him as their leader one day. Money would have to be spent on image consultancy, of course. Not to mention dermatological treatment. But wasn’t Barson?-Garland divorced? That wouldn’t do. Spokesmen for the family should be happily married. No, it was nothing more than a separation, Oliver recalled, and not yet picked up on by the press. She was the daughter of an earl, if he remembered rightly. Not quite the populist touch that the Conservative Party craved these days. On the other hand, it would never do to underestimate the snobbery of the Great British Electorate. They preferred the public school and Oxford manners of a Blair to all that forced Yorkshire ‘man of the people’ nonsense that came from Hague. As for poor old John Major...

No, the tide of history had washed weirder flotsam than Barson-Garland into Downing Street and no doubt would do so again. If he succeeded in getting Simon Cotter to unbelt some of his millions and drop them in the Tory coffers Ashley would take a deal of stopping.

Oliver smiled his most charming and confiding smile. ‘A superb lunch, Ashley. I don’t know when I’ve had a better. We should do this more often.’

‘Perhaps — what is today?’ Ashley looked at his watch. ‘Thursday. Perhaps we should meet here the first Thursday of every month? Chew things over and work our way through the wine list?’

‘An admirable idea.’

‘Would you like me to propose you for membership?’

Oliver put up his hands,. ‘Above my touch,’ he said. ‘Quite above my touch.’

They parted, each glowing with a warm sense of self-satisfaction and good wine.

The theme from Mission Impossible rang out in Jim and Micky Draper’s cell. It was muffled by Micky’s pillow, but loud and insistent enough to distract the brothers, who were watching The Shawshank Redemption and in no mood to be disturbed.

‘Bollocks,’ said Jim. ‘Nobody calls on a Sunday afternoon. Leave it.’

The tune continued to play for a full minute before falling silent.

Tim Robbins and his fellow prisoners sipped beers on the roof of Shawshank Prison.

‘Lucky bastards,’ said Jim. ‘I could do with a pint myself.’

‘I could do with some of that sunshine,’ said Micky.

Mission Impossible started up again.

‘Who the fuck?’

‘I’ll see who it is.’ Micky went to his bunk and moved the pillow aside. ‘Doesn’t say. Number withheld. Shall I answer the fucker?’

Jim paused the movie and Micky pressed a key on the mobile.

‘Is that Mr Draper?’

‘It’s Micky Draper. Who wants to know?’





THE STARS’




‘Good afternoon, Micky,’ said an unfamiliar male voice. ‘Sorry to disturb your Sunday afternoon movie. Tim Robbins escapes and the prison governor commits suicide. Morgan Freeman finally gets his parole and joins Robbins in Mexico. Charming film. I thought you should know the outcome as I’m afraid you won’t be able to watch the rest of it.’

‘Who the fuck is this?’

‘A well-wisher calling to let you know that all privileges are to be withdrawn from you and your brother as of right now.

‘Do what?’

‘You and Jim are enjoying quite absurd levels of comfort and protection. It’s a little unfair, don’t you think?’

‘Who is it?’ Jim asked, turning from the screen.

‘Some fucking posh nutter,’ said Micky. ‘Says we’re going to lose our privileges.’

‘Oh no,’ said the voice. ‘Not a nutter. Considering that I’m taking all this trouble to give you advance warning I think that’s somewhat ungrateful. Prison officers will be arriving at any moment. They will take away your television, your toaster and kettle, your radio, your furniture — even the mobile phone we’re having this nice little chat on. I’m afraid you’re both going to have to start right at the bottom of the heap again.’

‘Who is it?’ repeated Jim.

‘It’s a fucking wind up merchant. Did Snow put you up to this?’

‘It grieves me to relate that I do not have the honour of Mr Snow’s acquaintance. This is all my own work. Stand by your bunk now, Micky. The screws are on their way. I have a melancholy feeling that they are in a rough mood. You and Jim have been getting a little soft and flabby lately, I do hope you can take it. Goodbye.’

Micky dropped the phone onto the bunk.

‘What was all that about?’

‘Some twat,’ said Micky. ‘His idea of a practical joke. When I find out who it was —‘ Micky turned towards the cell door, alarmed by the sound of metal tipped heels marching along the corridor towards their cell. ‘Nah,’ he said. ‘That’s impossible.’

‘What?’ repeated his brother, perplexed.

A voice shouted their names in a tone they had not heard for years and the cell door swung open.

‘Draper, J., Draper M. Stand by your bunks. Inspection!’

Five screws came into the cell, followed by the Senior Prison Officer, Martin Cardiff.

‘Well, well. What have we here? A Babylonian orgy by the looks of it. A Babbi-fucking-lonian orgy. I have never seen such decadence in all my life. Not in all my life.’ This was not strictly true, since SPO Cardiff liked nothing better of a morning than to join the brothers for a cup of coffee and a slice of toast in their cell. ‘Look at this, lads. A sofa, books, magazines, a coffee machine. Even a little fridge. Highly cosy.’

‘What the fuck’s going on, Martin?’

Cardiff’s eyes narrowed. ‘Martin? Martin? Oh dear, oh dear. Whatever happened to courtesy? Whatever happened to respect?’

Cardiff nodded to a prison officer who stepped forward and threw a punch so deep into Jim Draper’s stomach that he fell to the ground whooping for breath.

‘It’s Mr Cardiff to you, you fat cunt. You fat disgusting cunt,’ he added with distaste, as Jim vomited over himself.

Micky started towards Cardiff. ‘What did you do that for? What the fuck d’you do that for?’

This time Cardiff administered the blow himself, driving his fist into the side of Micky’s neck. The iron frame of the bunk rang as Micky crashed into it head first.

‘There’s the bell for Round Two,’ said Cardiff. ‘Time for a bit of tag wrestling, lads.’

The prison officers laughed as they moved in on the brothers and set to work.

An hour later Jim and Micky were lying naked on the floor of their empty cell. The screws had taken everything, even the bunk-bed and mattresses. Before slamming the door on the brothers they had hosed the cell to wash away the blood and vomit.

For five years, Jim and Micky Draper had ruled the prison. Nothing had moved, nothing had worked and nothing had been traded without their say so. The arrangement, as usual, had suited the governor and his staff admirably and they had repaid the Drapers in the usual way, by allowing them levels of comfort and autonomy that were denied the ordinary inmate. Now, suddenly and for no reason at all this had been taken away from them. The occupants of the neighbouring cells would have heard their weeping screams for mercy and their plight would already be known all over the prison. Power depends on strength and the appearance of impregnability. Many prisoners had cause to hate the Drapers and now that all support and protection had been withdrawn from them, their lives would be horribly different.

Jim raised his head. The posters had been taken from the wall and all he could see were smears of blood and buttons of blu-tak. His brother lay on the floor beside him.

‘Micky?’ he whispered, the effort shooting arrows of pain all around his body. ‘On the phone. Who the fuck was it?’

But Micky was unconscious.

Jim’s head dropped back to the floor and he tried to focus his thoughts. They would be out in a year, but it would be twelve months of fear and pain. From this moment on they were in hell. Jim consoled himself with

one thought. The Drapers held one advantage over ordinary people, an edge that had helped them and given them strength throughout their troubled and violent lives. They had each other.

‘I think they should be separated as soon as possible,’ said Simon Cotter.

‘Different cells, you mean?’

‘Perhaps different wings. Would that be a possibility?’

‘Consider it done, sir.’

Cotter put a hand over the phone and apologetically shrugged his shoulders at the boy who had just come into his office. ‘With you in a moment, he said. ‘Just got to get this sorted out.’

Taking this to mean that he should leave, Albert turned towards the door.

‘No, no. Stay. Sit down, sit down.’

‘Sir?’

‘Not you, Cardiff.’

‘Is there a problem talking, sir?’

‘No, no, not at all. How are our friends this morning?’

‘Well, sir, Micky was out for eighteen hours, but he’s conscious now. They’ll both be taking food by straw for a month.’

‘Oh that is good news. Well done.’

‘Er...’

‘Say on, Mr Cardiff.’

‘I think you might have accidentally overpaid me, sir.’

‘How very honest of you. Not an overpayment, Mr Cardiff. Appreciation of a job well done. Your email was most marvellously and entertainingly composed. Quite beyond the call of duty. You should consider a literary career, you know.’

‘Well, thank you very much indeed, sir. Very kind indeed.’

‘Goodbye then.’ Cotter put down the phone and smiled across the desk. It had amused him to notice that the boy had been studying the carpet with great concentration, as if to imply that by not looking at the telephone he had not been listening. Quite illogical, but human and most charmingly polite. ‘So sorry about that. What a pleasure to meet you. I’m Simon Cotter.’

Albert stood up to shake hands across the desk.

‘No, no. I’ll come round. We’re not very desky here. They are tables to put computers and phones on, not for talking across.

They shook hands and Simon led Albert to the corner of the office.

‘Now then,’ Simon sat down in an armchair and pointed Albert to the sofa opposite him. ‘I said in my letter how much I admired the work you have done for your father’s company. Quite brilliant. I nearly said “for an amateur but we are all amateurs at this game and your work was brilliant I think by any standards.’

‘Amateur is the French for “lover”, after all,’ said Albert, shyly. ‘And it was very much a labour of love.’

‘Good for you! What I didn’t say in my letter was that I think Café Ethica is one of the great achievements of the last few years. Your father must be a remarkable man.

Albert’s face lit up. ‘He is, he really is! He used to work in commodities, trading tea and coffee futures in the City, but he went out there to Africa once and saw how the people lived and it completely changed his outlook. He now says, it’s not about coffee futures, it’s about human futures.’

‘Human futures, yes ... very good. Human futures.

How does he feel, I wonder, about the possibility of you joining us here?’

‘Well, since the website has been rather a success, I think he imagined that after university I would, you know...’ Albert trailed off and looked towards Cotter, who nodded sympathetically.

‘He thought you might go into the business with him? Look after the cyber side of life.’

Albert nodded. ‘And my mother...’

Simon moved a hand down to his knee and pressed it down to stop a slight involuntary jogging motion that had started up. ‘Your mother,’ he said, lightly. ‘She’s the famous Professor Fendeman, is she not? I have read her books.’

‘I think she’s worried about me not getting a degree.’

‘Naturally. Any mother would be. You’re due to go up to Oxford — how very modest of you not to mention it by name, by the way — in October of next year, I believe. Which college?’

‘St Mark’s.’

‘Any reason for that choice?’

‘My mother always said it was the best.’

‘Hm ... St Mark’s, that’s the one with the famous Maddstone Quad, isn’t it?’

‘I think so, yes.’

‘Very quaint as I remember.’

‘My mother’s always wanted me to go there. Doesn’t like the idea of me missing out on an education.'

‘I think she’s absolutely right,’ said Cotter. ‘I agree with her completely.’

The disappointment in Albert’s face was pitiful to behold. ‘Oh...’

‘But,’ Cotter continued. ‘I don’t like the idea of missing out on you. There’s ten months or so until October. Why don’t we come to an arrangement? Join us now and if in that ten months you and your family still feel that Oxford is a good idea, you can go. We’ll still be here when you emerge, all qualified and polished and graduated in your cap and gown. After all, you can carry on working for us in your vacations, and if you’ve done as well here as I think you will, we might even consider paying you a retainer, a kind of scholarship, if you like. As it happens we re looking at endowing a chair in IT at Oxford at the moment, so I think the university will be disposed to look favourably on anything we might suggest. Like all ancient and venerable English institutions Oxford will roll over backwards and do all kinds of undignified somersaults if there’s a smell of money in the air. How does that sound to you?’

‘It sounds ... it sounds ...‘ Albert searched hopelessly for a word. ‘It sounds brilliant.’

‘I’ll talk to my legal department about drawing up a contract. I like doing things quickly, if you’ve no objection. Let’s suppose a draft is delivered to you by five o’clock this evening. Your parents will want to show it to a lawyer. Perhaps you will have come to a decision by Friday? Come to me when it’s all been thoroughly thought through.’

Albert looked behind Cotter’s shoulder. A projector beamed the phrase ‘Thoroughly thought through’ onto the wall.

‘Ah, you’d spotted it. My motto. You’ll find it everywhere. On our screensavers and our desktop wallpaper.’ Cotter rose from his armchair and Albert instantly leapt to his feet.

‘Mr Cotter, I don’t know what to say.

‘It’s Simon. We’re very informal here. No suits, no surnames.’ Cotter put an arm round Albert’s shoulder and walked him to the door. ‘And by a happy coincidence, you’ll find that we only serve Café Ethica coffees and teas. Now, you’ll have to excuse me. Things are getting rather busy. I’m in the middle of trying to buy a newspaper. You’ve no idea how complicated a process it’s turning out to be.’

‘Really? I do it every day,’ said Albert, surprised at his own daring. ‘You just hand over money to the man in the shop and... voilà!’

‘Ha!’ Simon punched him playfully on the arm. ‘All this and a sense of humour too!’ How like his mother, he thought to himself. How absurdly like his mother. ‘I wish it were really that simple,’ he added. ‘I almost find myself feeling sorry for the Murdochs of this world. It’s nothing fancy, just the old LEP, but none the less, the regulations ...

‘LEP?’

‘London Evening Press. Way before you were born. But it’s about time the Standard had a rival, don’t you think? You never know, we might even start you on a column. Anyway, I look forward to hearing from you some time before Friday.’

Crossing Waterloo Bridge on his way to the restaurant where Gordon and Portia would be awaiting him, Albert looked back towards the great glass tower that he had just left. He was not a superstitious or a religious youth, but he could not help wondering what power or deity had blessed him with such outrageous good fortune. Like all seventeen-year-olds his sense of guilt was greater than his sense of pride and as a rule if he expected anything from fate it was more likely to be punishment than reward. Four and a half years ago, during his barmitzvah, he had mentally crossed his fingers and thought scabrous blasphemous thoughts throughout the ceremony. For weeks afterwards he had been in dread of God’s revenge. None had come. God had expressed his wrath by giving him good friends, sound health and kindly parents. To crown it all he was now to become a favourite in the Court of King Cotter.

He strode up the stone stairs of Christopher’s two at a time. Portia and Gordon, nervously sipping mineral water at their table, didn’t see him enter. He stopped a passing waiter and smiled broadly.

‘Could you bring a bottle of champagne to that table over there? The best you’ve got.'

‘Certainly, sir.’ The waiter bowed and hurried away.

‘Darling!’ Portia beckoned him over. ‘How was it? How did it go?’

‘Blimey, where do I start?’

Feeling absurdly adult, Albert sat down at the table and told them of Simon Cotter’s plans.

‘So you see, it’s the best of both worlds,’ he said. ‘Is that brilliant or what?’

A waiter approached their table with an ice-bucket and a bottle of Cristal.

Gordon had been staring down at his cutlery with furrowed brows as if listening for a catch somewhere in Albert’s breathless recitation. He looked up now at the waiter. ‘What’s this? I ordered no champagne.’

‘Er, that was me actually, Dad. I’ll pay you back for it soon, I promise.

Portia squeezed Albert’s hand. ‘Quite right too,’ she said, looking anxiously at Gordon. ‘This definitely calls for a celebration, don’t you think, darling?’

Albert caught the pleading note in his mother s voice and leaned forward to add his own encouragement.

‘Dad, I know it’s all moving very quickly, but it’s just great don’t you think? I mean, I can’t lose either way.

Gordon smiled suddenly and put a hand to Albert’s shoulder. ‘Of course, it’s great, Albie. My years in the City have made me cautious, that’s all. I’m sure everything’s fine. I’m proud of you. Truly.’

‘He said ...‘ Albert blushed slightly, ‘he said that he thought you were a remarkable man, Dad.’

‘Did he? Is that so? Well, he’s a remarkable man himself.’

‘He’s buying a paper at the moment, did you know that? The London Evening Press.’

‘Are you sure? There’s been nothing about it in the financial pages.’

‘Absolutely. He said it was a complicated business but it was time the Standard had some competition. He’s endowing a chair at Oxford too.’

‘Never mind about all that,’ said Portia. ‘Tell me what sort of man he is. Did he take his sunglasses off at any time? Do you think he’s Jewish? From pictures he looks impossibly dark and handsome. Does he dye his hair, do you think?’

‘For God’s sake, Mum...’ Gordon and Albert caught each other’s eyes and laughed with male solidarity.

‘Well, these things are important,’ Portia said defensively. ‘They tell you a lot about a person.

‘He’s read all your books anyway. He said so. What does that tell you about him?’

Father and son laughed again at Portia’s flustered reaction.

‘Let us drink to this paragon of taste and judgement,’ said Gordon, raising his glass.

‘To Simon Cotter,’ they chorused.

Rufus Cade sat in his flat and gazed lovingly at the money piled up in front of him. He had counted it twice and was considering counting it for a third time. Counting out a hundred thousand in used twenty pound notes is quite a task, but when the money is your own and wholly exempt from the ravenous clutches of tax men and ex-wives it is a pleasurable enough way to pass the time.

Rufus chopped a line on the small amount of free space on his coffee table. Finally, finally, things had taken a turn for the better. This evening was to be his last as a user. All those twenty pound notes were going to be put to good use. He would transform the business, settle down with a girl whose name didn’t begin with J and move to the country. Clean air, healthy exercise and a good diet would transform him from the flabby, sweating, red-eyed pig he had got to know into someone he could truly love. He realised now, as he looked at the money, that throughout his wretched life he had never even so much as liked himself. He would start by thinking more of others. Wasn’t that ‘the road less travelled’? The true path to self love is to take baby steps towards others.

To be able to go early into the office, with a clear sober head, that would be something in itself. There would be a special buzz to be got from sobriety, an irreducible high that would never lead to a terrible low. His cheerfulness and humour would become a byword. He had the weekend to begin the business of cleaning himself up. He would start any minute by throwing away his shot glasses and his silver straw. He might even drive round to see his parents. He played out the scene. His mother’s pleasure at seeing him, a bunch of flowers under his arm and a teasing joke on his lips, sprang to life within him and he smiled the broadest smile he had smiled for many years. He wasn’t such a bad man. He had a dry humour and quiet companionability that had appealed enough to turn three women into wives and countless others into girlfriends.

The entryphone buzzer sounded on the wall behind him and his heart banged in his chest at such a violent intrusion of the rude world into his thoughts. He rose from the sofa and was surprised to hear his voice trembling as he picked up the receiver.

‘Who is it?’

A voice he did not recognise spoke into the intercom with exaggerated intonation above the passing roar of traffic from the street. ‘I am a friend of John’s. It’s very important that I speak to you.

Rufus turned and looked at the money heaped on his table. ‘It’s not very convenient at the moment,’ he said. ‘I’m... I’m expecting some people.’

‘I won’t take more than five minutes. It’s for your own security.

‘Okay then... second floor.’

Rufus pressed the buzzer and ran to the kitchen for a bin liner. He stuffed the money into the bag and threw it into the corner of the room behind an armchair. By the time a knock came on the door, sweat was running down his face and he was out of breath.

He ran a sleeve across his dripping forehead and opened the flat door. A tall, powerfully built man of indeterminate age stood there, smiling apologetically, his eyes hidden by mirror shades.

‘I do apologise for calling so late.’

‘No, no... come in. I was just.., you know.’

The man came in and stood in the centre of the sitting-room. Rufus stared at him in disbelief.

‘Wait a minute... don’t I know you?’

‘The name’s Cotter. Simon Cotter.’

Rufus was already dizzy with the exertion of hiding his money. The presence of such a man as Simon Cotter on his doormat confused him completely. He could only imagine that there had been some problem with his look-alikes the day of that launch in Islington. But why on earth would Cotter himself come to visit him at home. On a Friday night, to boot. ‘I don’t quite follow. You said you were a friend of John’s.’

‘That’s right,’ said Cotter. ‘I’ve come to warn you.’

‘Warn me?’

‘The Suleiman brothers are rather upset.’

Rufus blinked. ‘I’m sorry. Suleiman brothers? I don’t believe I know anyone of that name.

‘You sold them a consignment of cocaine for a great deal of money. Only a few ounces of it were genuine. The rest was sherbet, I’m afraid. They are not in the least bit happy. Sherbet retails in sweetshops for a pitifully low price, I believe. Pitifully low. They’ll be wanting their money back. They may well want some pieces of your body to go with it. To be perfectly frank with you, they aren’t very nice people.’

Rufus had trouble focusing. Sweat was stinging his eyes. ‘I haven’t the faintest idea what you’re talking about,’ he said in a voice that he recognised as absurdly tremulous and far too high in register to carry conviction.

‘Really?’ Cotter’s eyebrows shot up. ‘Then I’m wasting your time as well as my own. I thought you might want to understand what was going on.’

‘Well, of course I want to know what’s going on, but...’

‘You’ve sold a dud and the vendor is coming for revenge. It’s really as simple as that.’

‘But it was John’s gear! John set the whole thing up. I only went along as ...

‘Ah, but John has been rather clever. I happen to know, you see, that he told them that all along he had been acting for you. As far as the Suleimans are concerned John is a nobody. A bagman, nothing more.’

‘But that’s a lie!’ Rufus grabbed the lapels of Cotter’s suit. ‘You’ve got to tell them. Tell them I acted in good faith. They’ll listen to you. In good faith.’

‘I?’ With the ease of a man brushing flies from his coat, Cotter took Rufus’s hands by the wrists and pulled them down. ‘Why in the name of God’s green earth should I do the slightest thing to help you?’

‘You know what happened! You can set them straight.’ Cotter looked at his watch. ‘They will be here in no more than five minutes. I left the front door on the latch. It’s a pity that you don’t seem to be in any kind of shape. I believe they favour machetes.’

Rufus almost danced with terror and bewilderment. ‘You can’t be serious. This is England.’

Cotter looked at him in amusement. ‘Yes,’ he said. ‘This is England. And you are English. Wipe your face, stop snivelling and put up a good show, that’s my advice. They may spare your life, you never know. The sight of you snotty, sweaty, dribbling and whimpering will only bring out their fullest rage, you can be sure of that. Believe me. I know something about bullies.’

Rufus edged towards the corner of the room, possessed with the wild idea of grabbing the rubbish sack and making a run for it.

‘Ah, you’ve stashed it over there, have you?’ Cotter peered behind the armchair. ‘Well at least they won’t have to look very hard for it. That may count in your favour.’

‘For pity’s sake,’ cried Rufus.

‘For pity’s sake?’ Cotter’s voice was hard and cold. ‘Did you just use the word pity?’

‘You can have the money. Take it all.’

‘My dear Cade, I already have more money than I could possibly spend. Don’t you read the newspapers?’

‘Then let me go. Protect me. Pay them off, I’ll do anything, anything you say.

‘Anything? Do you mean that?’

‘I promise!’ Something in Cotter’s voice lent Rufus hope. ‘Just tell me and I’ll do it.’

‘Very well. Sit down.’

Rufus obeyed instantly. Sweat and mucus dropped from his chin onto the sofa. It had been many years since Cotter had last seen a grown man tremble so violently. His face, his hands, his feet — every part of him quivered.

‘What do you want me to do? Tell me and I’ll do it.’

‘I want you to build me a time machine.'

‘What?’

‘I want you to build me a time machine and to go back twenty years into the past.'

‘I — I don’t understand.’

‘Really? Yet it’s so simple.’ said Cotter. ‘And it’s the only thing that will save you. All I want you to do is to go back to the day when you, Ashley Barson-Garland and Gordon Fendeman planned the destruction of my life. Go back and rewind the tape. Reverse your decision.’

Rufus turned dazed eyes on him. He was hallucinating. On the very day he had determined to give up coke, the drug had visited upon him some insane psychotic nightmare.

‘You don’t remember?’ Cotter went on, removing his sunglasses and staring him in the face. ‘You don’t remember planting dope in the pocket of my sailing jacket? You don’t remember standing in an alleyway in Knightsbridge giggling as they led me away? Go back and make it all unhappen. Do that for me and I’ll pay off the Suleiman brothers and more. I will set you up in idle luxury for the rest of your pitiful and disgusting life.’

‘Ned? Ned Maddstone?’ Rufus leapt up from the sofa. ‘Jesus, it is. It’s you. I don’t fucking believe it.’

‘But somehow I don’t think it can be done, can it? I know a little about physics and a little about technology. Something tells me that a time machine is wholly beyond your powers to invent.

‘Christ, man, where have you been? What happened to you?’

‘Get away from me,’ Cotter took a step backwards as Rufus once more clawed desperately at his jacket. ‘How dare you even think of touching me?’

‘This is a joke, right? You’re winding me up. It’s your idea of revenge. To get me shit scared. Fucking hell, man...

‘You’ll find out about shit scared,’ said Cotter. ‘You’ll discover that it’s more than a phrase. You’ll find out too that there’s something worse than fear. Something called dread.’

‘You’re not serious,’ Rufus almost laughed at the look on Cotter’s face. ‘I mean come on, we were kids! We didn’t know what we were doing. Anyway, you were kidnapped, it was in all the papers. That was nothing to do with us. Jesus, man...

‘My father died. My father. He clung on for six months unable to speak or move. He died in an agony of fear and guilt, believing that his only son had been kidnapped and killed because of him and his work. An honourable, decent man who gave everything he had to his country. A man incomparably above you in quality and greatness. He died because of what you and your friends did to me.’

Rufus looked round in terror at the sound of car brakes squealing in the street below. Cotter moved towards the door and replaced his sunglasses.

‘I just want you to think of me as they start work on you. I want you to think of a frightened and bewildered child who had everything taken away from him because of your spite and envy.’

Rufus had scrambled behind the armchair and stood now in the middle of the floor clutching his money.

‘They know about the fire-escape,’ said Cotter. ‘They are certain to have it covered.’

‘NED!’ screamed Rufus.

Cotter let himself out of the door.

‘MADDSTONE!’

Cotter went quickly up one flight of stairs and looked down the stairwell as three men came running up to the second floor. He saw a flash of bright silver as one of them transferred a gleaming metal knife from one hand to the other. Inside the flat he heard Rufus still screaming his name, over and over again.

The door slammed shut and all screaming stopped.

Five minutes later the door to the flat opened and the three men emerged. One carrying a black bin-liner. They said nothing as they descended the staircase.

Simon waited for the sound of their car being driven away before he crept down and entered the flat.

Rufus was lying on the floor in a spreading pool of blood that had already reached the extreme edges of the carpet. On the coffee table ten feet away from him, his legs had been neatly laid, one beside the other, like bouquets recently delivered by a florist.

‘Dear me,’ said Simon. ‘Legless again, Rufus.’

Rufus stared up at him. ‘Fuck you,’ he hissed. ‘Fuck you to hell.’

Simon looked down and shook his head. ‘Phew!’ he said with distaste. ‘I was right wasn’t I? Now you do know the meaning of shit scared. I pity the person who finds you. Let’s see, your cleaner comes on Monday, I believe. Maybe I should spare her sensibilities and warn the police. An anonymous tip-off perhaps ... you’re an expert in those, aren’t you? As a matter of fact you’re very lucky, do you know that? They say that it is quite pleasant to bleed to death. I dare say you won’t be feeling much pain. The effects of shock can be merciful. Not a word I have much use for, of course.

As he left, Rufus shouted after him. His voice came out huskily and over the next hour, as the life flowed out of him, he tried to console himself with the thought that Simon must have heard every word.

‘I was right about you from the first, Ned fucking Maddstone,’ he had called after him. ‘You were always an arrogant fucker. I saw through you from the very beginning! Fuck you, Ned. Fuck you. You deserved it. Whatever it was, you deserved it.’

Simon flicked out the latch and closed the door, leaning against it until the lock snicked home. Rufus’s words had not, in fact, penetrated the hammering in his own ears. He went slowly downstairs and out into the cold air.

Ned, trembling with exhilaration, looked up at the night sky. The stars winked down at him.

‘Four!’ he whispered, and winked back.

The Barson-Garland Page was turning out to be something of a saccès d’estime. Taking a cue from the regular columnists on the rival evening paper, Ashley found that he had a gift for tediously obvious opinions expressed in a formulaic polemical style that exactly suited the kind of brain-fagged commuter most ready to confuse polysyllabic misanthropy for intelligent thought. London’s appetite for trenchant attacks on ‘Political Correctness’ seemed to know no bounds and Ashley was happy to feed it. He had in abundance that peculiar journalistic gift of stating all the prevailing bourgeois prejudices in a language that represented itself as ‘maverick’, ‘daring’ and ‘unconventional’. Nor had the heroic failure of his Private Member’s Bill done anything to harm his growing reputation as one who dared to speak up for ‘Common Sense’, ‘Decency’, ‘Standards’ and the deeper feelings of the ‘Silent Majority’ and his beloved ‘Instincts of the British People’. Whispers were growing within the Party. Barson-Garland was achieving more for the Conservatives from the back benches than leading figures were managing from the front. His name had been openly mentioned by the BBC’s senior political correspondent as a contender in any future leadership election. Things were moving along well.

Simon Cotter had not been able to help him with his Bill, but had expressed his sympathy in an orotund style very like Ashley’s own.

‘I have no doubt that governmental access to net traffic is ultimately inevitable,’ he had agreed. ‘The imperatives of financial security, public morals and systemic virus protection will make the idea irresistible in time. I cannot be seen to endorse it, however. I’m sure you understand that for commercial reasons I must place myself on the side of the civil libertarians. When the time does come, I suspect that you will play some part in its implementation and I want to assure you that you will have our full co?operation here at CDC. In the meantime, I wonder if I can talk to you about something else? As you may know, we have recently acquired the London Evening Press. My editor is on the lookout for a good regular columnist. Does the idea appeal?’

The idea — and Cotter’s elegant (to Ashley’s mind) manner of phrasing it — had appealed greatly and Barson?-Garland had waxed great. On the back of his new found success as a Common Sense Tribune of the People, he had recently embarked upon a series of live television debates. Armed with a microphone and a bank of experts, victims and unbelievers, he stalked the studio like a grand inquisitor, probing moral and ethical issues to their depths: a Great White Oprah, an intellectual Jerry Springer, a Moral Montel for the New Millennium.

The first programme, under the title of ‘The Failure of Feminism’ had gone exceptionally well and he was currently preparing the next. His producer had told him that it was essential, in television, to put your heaviest artillery in the second programme in a series.

‘If the first is good,’ she had said, ‘the second must be better. Those who missed the opening episode will have been told about it by their friends or read reviews in the papers. They will tune in to number two in their droves, so let’s make it a stormer.’

It was to be entitled ‘The Threat of the Net’ and a stormer it would certainly be. Parents whose children had run up impossible phone bills or had met unsavoury perverts through chat room friendships, musicians whose royalties had been threatened — all had been lined up and were ready to accuse the defenders of the net, the authors of software that allowed mass music copyright infringe?ment, the service providers who failed to filter repulsive news groups, the credit card companies, the irresponsible online medical services, the whole internet establishment. One of the programme s researchers had built a bomb by using information readily available on the web, another had bought drugs and yet another — and this would surely constitute one of the most sensational exposés in television history — had been posing as a twelve-year-old for six months and was planning, live, to meet another apparent minor whom the programme had deduced (by linguistic analysis) to be an adult. A hidden camera would record the whole scene and police were standing by to make an arrest.

On the day of transmission, Ashley appeared to be the only one with a cool head. A group of parents had found themselves having supper in the studio canteen next to a man whose laptop displayed repulsive photographs of dead bodies and mutilated limbs. The parents had screamed and accused the producers of insensitivity, stupidity and deliberate manipulative wickedness. Ruffled feathers were smoothed when it turned out that the offending laptop belonged to a reporter who was researching Angolan landmines for a completely unconnected programme. The reporter in question, who had gone off to join the supper queue, was severely reprimanded for leaving his computer unattended. The father of the child who had opened the laptop was persuaded against legal action and relative calm was restored.

By the time Ashley made his opening address, the studio was crackling with tension.

‘Cyberspace, the final frontier ...' he began, standing in the centre of the studio. ‘We have sought out new worlds and new civilisations. We have boldly gone where no man has gone before and what has been our reward? An explosion in crime, gambling, pornography, exploitation, video-gaming and vice — a good old-fashioned word for a bad old-fashioned evil. No laws stand between a seven-year-old child and the corruption of his innocence. We are told nothing can be done about this. Is that true? Is there no such thing as political will? Are we already victims of the machine? Or is it just possible that humanity, as it always has, still retains the power to say No? Is it too late to decide simply to walk away?

‘Against the anarchy and degradation represented by the slimier corners of the net stands one institution: ancient, kindly, wise, noble, but apparently powerless in the face of man’s lust for technology ... we call this institution The Family. What a pitifully small thing it seems when ranged against the colossal vested interests and unquenchable greed of e-commerce and the great e-?future. Is it possible that the still, small voice of the Family can stand up to such howling din? Can the British Family truly resist... The Threat of The Net?’

Music. Applause. Titles. A collage of images showing Ashley Barson-Garland, bald, unprepossessing, ugly even, but somehow made glorious by his very ordinariness. He stands, he swoops, he glides, he bobs his way through ranks of admiring studio guests. There are stand-up rows and tearful reconciliations. The face of Barson-Garland stands above them all. The final image: his summing-up, directly into camera, his eyes holding yours as he weaves together the threads of the week’s debate. End music. End titles. End applause.

A double-sided plasma wide-screen television was hung high in CotterDotCom’s atrium. The atrium café, as usual, was busy. At eight in the evening most offices are the lonely province of security guards, cleaners and a handful of career climbers. Simon Cotter found that often he had to remind his staff, gently, to go home and help themselves to a life. He was there himself in the atrium that night, laughing with the others at Barson-Garland’s intro?ductory speech.

‘Dear me,’ he said, peering over the top of his sunglasses as the title sequence played. ‘It seems that the Net is in for a spanking, guys.

‘He talks,’ said Albert Fendeman, who was sitting at the same table, ‘as if everyone who has anything to do with the net comes from another planet. I mean, we’ve all got families too. Doesn’t he realise that?’

‘It’s hard to imagine that he has a family, anyway, observed an intense young girl standing by their table and looking up at the screen with distaste.

‘Actually,’ said Albert sheepishly, ‘he’s an old friend of my family.’

‘Really?’ Simon was intrigued. ‘We should be polite about him then.’

‘Christ no, I never liked him. He always spoke to me like a schoolmaster, even when I was young.

‘And you’re so old now, of course,’ said the girl, who was one of the best programmers in the country, but barely twenty herself.

‘Sh!’ hissed someone from another table. ‘There’s Brad Messiter.’

Barson-Garland was standing in front of a guest known to everyone at Cotters. Brad Messiter had founded the fastest growing free Internet Service Provider in the country and Ashley was preparing to roast him whole.

‘You advertise during children’s television programmes and in children’s magazines. Your give-away CDs are available on sweetshop counters, packaged with cartoons and the faces of football stars. Yet your service offers no filters and no parental lock-outs ...‘

‘Parents can buy fully functional gatekeeper packages which...’ the hapless Messiter began, but Ashley swept on regardless.

‘You’ll get your chance to speak later. For the moment let’s just set out what you do. You offer a full internet package, including unrestricted access to newsgroups of the most revolting kind. We’re all familiar with commercial web sites, many of which, it’s true, are guarded by some kind of credit card security. But newsgroups offer pictures and movies to anyone. Anyone. Let me run by some of the groups a child on your service might come across without the need for anything other than a personal computer and infant curiosity. Alt.binary.pictures.besti?ality, alt.binary.pictures.lolita, alt.binary.pictures.fore?skins ... and there are literally hundreds of others here that are too grotesque, too bizarre and too horrifying for me to mention on air. This is the nature of the business that has made you a millionaire many times over. True or not true, Mr Messiter?’

‘There are thousands of magazines and photographs currently in the postal system.

‘True or not true, Mr Messiter?’

‘Currently being processed by the Royal Mail, technically the property of the Queen, which you would find just as offensive and which...’

‘True or not true, Mr Messiter?’

‘True or not true!’ chorused the studio audience. ‘True or not true?’

‘Yes, it’s true, but as I say ...

‘It’s true!’ Ashley whipped the microphone away and walked towards the camera. ‘Mr Messiter’s twisted logic would have us believe that Her Majesty the Queen is somehow a pornographer, which tells us all we need to know about Mr Messiter, I think. We’ll be returning to him later, but meanwhile, let’s follow our researcher, Jamie Ross. For six months now, in the guise of twelve—year-old Lucy, Jamie has been conducting a romantic relationship with a boy of thirteen called Tom. Innocent, charming, perfectly acceptable. Nothing more than a pen friendship. Tom has now suggested they meet. Our language experts have analysed the emails and messages that Tom has been sending Lucy and they have determined that they were composed by an educated adult. Jamie.’

The Cotter Atrium watched with barely suppressed giggles as an earnest reporter stood on the corner of Argyll Street and Marlborough Street talking in a hushed whisper. A small girl stood nervously beside him.

‘Any moment now, I will be going into Wisenheimer’s, a hamburger restaurant popular with young people, just fifty yards from London’s famous Oxford Circus, for an assignation with “Tom”. He will be expecting a small girl, so I have brought along my daughter, Zoë. In my rucksack I have a hidden camera and sound recorder. The police are standing by to make an arrest if it turns out, as we strongly suspect, that “Tom” is an adult, masquerading as a child. Here goes.

A grainy but acceptable picture came on screen as the reporter, Jamie Ross, entered the restaurant and sat at a table, pointing his wide angled briefcase at the door. His daughter Zoë came in a second or two later and sat at another table.

‘So far,’ breathed Jamie into his radio mike. ‘Nothing. Mostly young people here, tourists by the look of them, a few adults spread out at different tables. The ideal spot for this kind of rendezvous perhaps. Ah, what’s this?’

A small nervous looking boy of twelve or thirteen had entered the restaurant, taken one look at Zoë, another at the table where Jamie sat with his camera bag and then sat down at an empty table.

‘Well, perhaps, our experts were wrong,’ the disappointment in Jamie’s voice was palpable.

‘Experts? Wrong?’ The crowd gathered in the Cotter Atrium were enjoying themselves hugely. ‘Surely not?’

‘Perhaps I should ask him what he’s doing there...’ Jamie picked up his camera bag and moved towards the young boy. ‘Hello, there,’ he said, placing the bag on the table between them. ‘Your name isn’t Tom by any chance?’

The boy made no verbal reply but stood up and pointed. Instantly, from different tables, half a dozen men and women sprang forward and surrounded the astonished Jamie.

‘You are under arrest,’ said one, attaching handcuffs, ‘on suspicion of luring a minor...’

‘Wait a minute, I’m Jamie Ross from the BBC...’

‘You do not have to say anything in your defence, but I must warn you that silence may be interpreted...’

The screen went blank for a second before cutting back to the studio and a rather flustered Ashley Barson-?Garland.

‘Well,’ he said. ‘It looks as though... that is to say...’ In the CDC Atrium, Albert and the female coder were rolling around honking with laughter like seals.

‘Sh!’ said Cotter. ‘Let’s not miss the rest of it.’

‘It seems that perhaps this was a case of two minds with but a single thought,’ Ashley continued, drawing on all his reserves of aplomb, ‘two hearts, ah, beating each to each.’

‘What?’ roared Albert, writhing with delight. ‘Has he gone completely tonto?’

‘Robert Browning,’ said Simon. ‘When the mind goes, reflex literary quotation takes over.

‘But none the less, a lesson to be drawn there. The world of the chat room clearly arouses enough parental concern to cause a great deal of worry. We will bring you, of course, news of Jamie Ross’s release as soon as it comes.

‘Who’s looking after Zoë?’

‘Ah, well no doubt...’ Ashley looked up at the bank of studio audience to identify the heckler. ‘I’m sure she’s ...

‘Someone has just left a twelve-year-old girl alone in a West End burger joint. I can see it on the monitor above. She’s just sitting there on her own.

‘I’m sure Jamie will inform the police right away...’

‘Call that responsible?’

‘Ah, Mr Messiter. It’s you.’

‘Too right it’s me. Hoist with your own petard there, weren’t you?’

‘Mr Messiter seems very interested in the fate of unprotected children, ladies and gentlemen.’ Ashley swiftly regained his composure. ‘Yet his company continues to open the porn portals of the internet to all, without accepting responsibility. He even manages to blame the parents. It’s their fault. If they only bought expensive and complex software to guard their children’s access, then all would be well.’

‘It isn’t expensive, it’s available free on...'

‘Well, let me now introduce you to an expert in the field of internet security. From CotterDotCom, Cosima Kretschmer!’

The Atrium fell silent and all eyes turned from the screen to Simon. He shrugged lightly. ‘You’re all free,’ he said. ‘If Cosima wants to speak and share her expertise on television, how could I possibly stand in her way?’

All heads turned back to the screen. It was rumoured that Cosima, whom Simon had brought back from the Geneva office, was more than just the head of the Secure Server Research Division. She and Simon had recently been photographed together coming out of the Ivy Restaurant. It seemed doubtful that she would consent to appear as a witness for Ashley Barson-Garland without Simon’s express wish. Albert frowned as he watched her take the microphone. He could not believe that his mentor, his hero, his god, would lend support to anything that threatened the sanctity and autonomy of the net.

Simon was watching the screen with a look of bland benevolence.

‘Fräulein Kretschmer, I’m sure only those who’ve holidayed on Mars for the last two years have failed to hear of CotterDotCom. You specialise in internet security, is that right?’

‘That is quite correct.’

‘I believe service providers can choose to make available all or only some newsgroups on their news servers, is that also correct?’

‘Certainly.’

‘So Mr Messiter’s company, the largest free provider in the United Kingdom, isn’t obliged to offer the full range of newsgroups. He could choose to filter out those which carry illegal child pornography, for example.’

‘For sure.

‘Now, as you may know, I proposed a bill which would

have allowed the monitoring of such obscene transactions and I was told by the so-called “internet community” that such a course was “impractical”. Were they right?’

‘Not at all. People may use proxy servers and firewalls, but it is usually possible to detect those who upload and download illegal materials.’

‘It is possible? Do you think the government should take steps to implement the tracking of this kind of traffic?’

‘No, I do not.’

Ashley flickered for a moment. ‘Forgive me, Fräulein Kretschmer...’

‘Cosima, please.’

‘You told me earlier that you did believe in such monitoring.’

‘Did I?’

‘You know you did.’

‘It is a complex matter. The question of civil liberties is important. I have been thinking more deeply on this subject lately.’

‘Civil liberties? What about the rights of families to live free of fear and contamination. Do those count for nothing?’

A hearty round of applause interrupted the first part of Cosima’s reply.

‘Well, let us suppose,’ she said, ‘that in my research I came upon evidence of a person who had regularly used the internet for his own personal sexual gratification. Downloading illegal pornography and so forth. Do I have the right to expose such a person?’

‘Of course you do. If their computer drives contain illegal material it’s the same as possessing it in photographic form on paper. We all know that.’

‘Ah but this person is clever. He looks at the pictures on screen, but does not store them. He deletes the memory cache once he has ... once he has satisfied himself, you understand?’

Ashley’s stern voice cut through a bubble of titters emanating from the back row of the audience. ‘All this hypothetical speculation seems to me to miss the main point of our discussion,’ he said. ‘We are addressing ...

‘It is at the absolute heart of our discussion,’ Brad Messiter shouted from the back, unmiked, but loud enough to be heard. ‘Tell us more about this hypothetical case, Cosima.’

‘As a matter of fact,’ said Cosima, who unlike Messiter had a radio microphone clipped to the lapel of her jacket, ‘it is not hypothetical. I am talking about you, Mr Barson-?Garland. You. You have logged up an average of sixteen hours a week accessing sites devoted to photographs of young teenage boys.’

A gasp ran round the studio as Ashley whipped round, his face white, to face Cosima. ‘I should warn you that I am a lawyer,’ he snarled. ‘Such unsubstantiated accusa?tions are highly actionable. You cannot have a shred of evidence to support such outrageous...’

‘But I have,’ said Cosima, pointing to a briefcase. ‘I have tracked your internet use for many months now and watched you accessing web-cam sites, newsgroups and youth chatrooms.’

‘I have... I have ...’ beads of sweat were beginning to appear on Ashley’s brow. ‘I have naturally researched all areas of the internet during the course of my campaign. It would be absurd to attempt to legislate against pornography without investigating it first.’

‘But why only teenage boys? Why only sites with titles like “Studmuffins For You”, “Twink Heaven”, “Smooth

Buns R Us” and “First Cum First Served” — why only those?’

Ashley felt he was drowning in a sea of laughter.

‘It is perfectly clear to anyone of sense,’ he hissed into his microphone, ‘that I have been made the victim of a very clever conspiracy to besmirch my name and belittle the national campaign I have set up on behalf of the family. You cannot possibly prove any one of these revolting allegations. You have only recorded the internet use on my part that suits you and deliberately chosen to ignore the thousands of other visits I may or may not have legitimately made in the name of research. These vicious and repulsive smears show how far the internet establishment is prepared to go...’

‘I note,’ Cosima continued remorselessly, ‘that you always delete your client-side disk and internet cache. There will be no evidence at your home whatsoever.’

‘Of course there won’t be!’ Ashley shrieked. ‘There will be no evidence at my home because everything you have said is a farrago of lies, innuendo and twisted half truths. I don’t know if your employer is aware of what you have been doing —‘

‘Your employer too, don’t forget. You write a column for his newspaper —‘Never mind that! If I discover that you have been snooping around me on Cotter company time, the legal consequences will be such as you cannot imagine. Let me assure you of that, Fräulein!’

In the Atrium, two dozen mouths had dropped open and two dozen pairs of rounded eyes were staring at the giant plasma television. A scene, Simon supposed, that was reproduced in different numbers and configurations up and down the land. Albert peeked shyly once more at the face of his hero but could read nothing behind the mirrored lenses. Mild astonishment showed in the gentle uplift of one of his eyebrows, that was all.

Albert’s mother and father had watched the moon landing as children, Gordon in New York and Portia in London. Albert himself retained vague memories of 0. J.’s white Bronco being followed by news helicopters as it wound along the freeways of Los Angeles, but this.., this was a memory by which his generation would judge themselves forever. Where were you when Cosima Kretschmer humiliated Ashley Barson-Garland on live television? I was watching television, derr-brain, the smart arses would reply, where were you?

Cosima Kretschmer appeared to be the only calm person in the studio. The director up in the gallery was deep in a telephone conversation with his channel controller who had a lawyer on the other line. ‘Keep going,’ the controller ordered. ‘We’re okay. It’s up to Barson-Garland. He can hardly sue us for defamation on his own show.’

‘It is my suggestion,’ Cosima was saying, ‘that you have consistently downloaded obscene and mostly illegal pictures of youths onto your computer. You have masturbated in front of these images and then deleted them.’





THE STARS’




Several parents had clamped hands over the ears of their children, who writhed and wriggled in their attempts to work free.

‘You have just earned yourself one terrifying court case!’ Ashley yelled, pointing a finger at her and shaking with rage.

‘That is your privilege. I have video pictures of you doing precisely that. Yes!’ Cosima repeated as a sudden hush fell on the studio and all eyes turned to stare at Ashley. ‘I have hours of videotape showing you masturbating in front of the screen in the study of your own house in London.’

‘Such footage would be completely inadmissible in any court,’ said Ashley, a terrible weight swelling in the pit of his stomach, ‘if it existed, that is. Which they do not. You are getting yourself further and further into trouble, young lady.’

‘But we are not talking about any court. We are talking about this court,’ Cosima continued remorselessly. ‘Your court. You cannot have any objection to my showing my evidence here.’ She pulled two cassettes from her briefcase. “‘There are no steps that should not be taken in the name of the family, in the name of decency.” Your own words. True or not, Mr Barson-Garland?’

Ashley stood frozen in the centre of the studio. Brad Messiter led a baying chorus of ‘True or not? True or not?’ The voices fused and swelled in his head. His mouth opened and closed, but his eyes followed the video cassettes that Cosima was brandishing above her head, never leaving them for a second.

‘I have printouts of your diary too, Mr Barson?-Garland,’ Cosima’s free hand dipped into her briefcase and brought out sheaves of paper. ‘What extraordinary reading they make.’

Ashley screeched in rage and made a half lunge towards her. At the last minute he veered away from her and ran from the studio, dropping his microphone on the floor. Blindly, he butted his way past security officers too startled and confused to know what to do. He tore down the corridors and into reception, barely noticing the cluster of BBC employees staring at the screens set into the wall. He pushed his way out of the glass doors and hurtled madly through the horse-shoe forecourt and out onto Wood Lane. He heard voices raised behind him but he charged through the security gate and into the street. Cabs were lined up on the rank and he hurled himself at the first, scrabbling at the door.

‘All right mate, all right. Calm down.’ The driver released his central locking switch and Ashley threw himself onto the seat.

‘St James’s!’

‘I know you! You’re that Barson-Garland bloke.’

‘Never mind,’ Ashley’s breath came in huge gulping sobs. ‘Duke Street, as fast as you can.

‘Right-o. Shame that Bill of yours was never passed. It’s about time those perverts were brought to book. Got kids myself.’

Ashley felt in his pocket and almost wept with relief when his fingers closed around his leather Smythson key wallet. He had left the keys in his dressing-room the previous week and had been forced to return to Television Centre at midnight to retrieve them. He had cursed himself at the time but had that not happened, he would never have decided to keep them in his pocket today. He looked out of the back window of the cab and saw a crowd streaming from the studio audience door at the side of the building.

‘Had that Gary Glitter in here once,’ said the cabby.

As Ashley had feared, a small crowd had already gathered in Mason’s Yard. A handheld TV light focused on his front door and was turned towards the cab as it swung into the alley from Duke Street.

‘Strewth, you’ve got a few fans, then,’ said the cabby, shielding his eyes. ‘Going to make you party leader are they?’

Ashley pushed a twenty pound note through the glass and opened the cab door, his keys ready. ‘Keep the change.’

‘Very generous, guv’nor. You’ve got my vote!’

‘Mr Barson-Garland! Mr Barson-Garland!’

‘I have no comment, no comment. No comment. No comment at all.’

He pushed his way through the press of people, head down, key outstretched towards the door.

‘Is there any truth in these allegations?’

‘No comment, I tell you! I have absolutely no comment.’ He slammed the door on them and bolted it. As soon as he was alone, the tears began to flow.

The telephone upstairs in his study was ringing. He wrenched it from its socket and stood on the carpet, tears flowing down his cheeks. All around him were displayed the symbols of his success. The Romney portrait of a Sir William Barson that he had allowed people to believe was his ancestor stared down at him, hand on hip. His first editions of Gibbon, Carlyle and Burke gleamed on the shelves. And on the desk stood his computer.

It was a lie. All a lie. They had trapped him. For some evil, terrible reason they had trapped him into revealing himself. Video cameras in his study! It was inconceivable. Who would do such a thing? Inconceivable. Yet, they must have known. They could not have guessed that it was his practice to...

He woke his computer and input the first password. The diary files were also password protected, security within security. No one could have penetrated them. He double-clicked the most recent entry, made yesterday, when the world was still at his feet. The system demanded a second password, which he gave. The diary pages loaded themselves and he looked at them.

Sad news about poor old Rufus Cade. By all accounts a ‘drug hit’, as these things are termed. I suppose it was inevitable. From schoolboy on, it was apparent that dear Rufus was destined for a life of dependency and decline. What Americans would call ‘an addictive compulsive personality’ or some such hogwash. I have not seen him since he called upon me some five years ago with an embarrassing request for money to invest’ in a footling scheme to start up a model agency. I shall attend his funeral, I think and pray for the salvation of his soul. Grace will not be denied him.

A gratifying review of the first programme in the Telegraph this morning. It seems I am ‘a natural performer combining ease of manner with a steely refusal to be diverted from the hard moral questions’. Look out, David Starkey!

Gratifying! Would he ever use that word again? Or any word like it? Wiping back his tears, Ashley scrolled down until he saw something that made his heart stop.

Red!

Impossible, but true.

The last paragraph of his last diary entry was in red. Ashley never messed about with coloured text. Never. The paragraph was in a different font too. A font he never used.

His eyes hardly dared drag themselves to the bottom of the screen. If he read the paragraph he would know for sure that it was not a mistake, not the result of some inadvertent series of mouse clicks on his own part. He did not want to know any such thing. But he had to read on.

Hypocrite, lecteur, mon semblable, mon frère! Not for the first time do I find myself reading your diary, Ashley Garland. You have not graduated far have you? From masturbating into school boaters to masturbating at pictures of schoolboys. What a pathetic failure of a man.

All pretence, snobbery, intolerance, bluster, bigotry and show. With such a brain as yours you could have gone so far, Ashley Garland. With such a cold, constipated heart, however, you were always destined for disgrace, ruin and humiliation. I wonder how they will treat you in prison? You fake, you pervert, you canting hypocrite. My revenge on you is complete. May you rot for ever in the burning filth of your own corruption.

The red text swam before Ashley’s eyes. He pressed his hands to the side of his head and pushed inwards, as if forcing his brain to concentrate. Tears dropped onto the keyboard.

This was insanity. Wild madness of a kind that could not be explained. He had his enemies. He was not universally liked, he knew that. He had always known that. But such demented hatred?

A flashing folder icon on the computer desktop caught his eye. It was entitled ‘Yummee!’ and Ashley knew that he had never seen it before. He double-clicked the folder which showed itself to contain over two thousand files, all of them in picture and movie formats. He double-clicked one at random and his screen was filled with a video clip of such clarity and unspeakable, uncompromising physical detail that he caught his breath. The participants were all male and under age.

The doorbell rang.

Ashley closed the file instantly and dragged the whole folder to his desktop waste basket.

The doorbell rang again.

Ashley emptied the wastebasket. A window came on screen.

Cannot delete without password

Ashley input his password and tried again.

Password incorrect

Ashley tried his secondary password.

Password incorrect. System shutting down...

Ashley stared unbelievingly at the screen as it went blank with a fizz and crackle of static.

The doorbell rang for a third time.

A flashing blue light was reflected on the wall behind the computer. Ashley rose, went to the window and looked down through the curtains. A battery of flashlights almost blinded him and he stepped back.

‘Damn you all,’ he sobbed, his whole body trembling. ‘Damn you all.’

A picture arose in his mind of his mother and sister in Manchester. They would have been watching the programme. Perhaps with neighbours. There was a news camera down in the yard below him pointing up at his window. Yes, they would be watching now, white faced and ashamed, hands over mouths. The neighbours would have crept away and dashed to their houses and television sets. Everyone from chambers, everyone in the Conservative Party would be watching. His wife, she was watching too and her father would be saying ‘Told you so, something not quite top drawer about your Ashley. Thought so from the first.’ Oliver Delft, he would have watched and already he would have scratched Ashley’s name from his list of useful contacts. The news would have got round the Carlton Club and they would all be crowded into the television room, watching. Everybody would watch him being led away and everybody would watch his trial.

No, they would not. No one would watch him. No one. The doorbell rang again and a distorted voice, amplified by a megaphone, called up from the street below.

‘Mr Barson-Garland! My name is Superintendent Wallace. Please let us into the house. The yard will be cleared of cameras and press, you have my word.’

Ashley stumbled into the kitchen. His Sabatier knives gleamed invitingly. Those few friends that he had knew Ashley to be a fine cook. His knives, like everything else about him, were perfect. He pulled one from its wooden block and returned to his study, crying like a child.

All his life, he realised, he had felt like an antelope being chased by a lion. The hot stinking breath of fate had pursued him close but he had always found new spurts of speed, dazzling new zig-zags of energy and wit that had kept the beast away. Now he was finally being shaken in its jaws and he didn’t care. Damn them, damn them all! It wasn’t his fault. He had never chosen to be who he was. He had never chosen to be ugly, to be bald, to be ‘not quite top drawer’, to be attracted by youth, to be socially inept, to be despised by the arrogant ease and vanity of Them. Them with their flops of silky hair and flops of silky charm. Damn them all!

He pushed the knife into his throat and twisted it round and round and round.

At the same time he heard the door downstairs being beaten open and saw, through the jets of blood pumping from his neck, that his computer had come to life. He imagined, and it must have been imagination, that he read these words crawling across the screen like tickertape from left to right in bright red letters.

Ned Maddstone sends you to hell

His mind had time to wonder why, in the delirium of his last moments on this mean earth, the name of Ned Maddstone should have come to him. Perhaps it was appropriate. Ned had been the archetype of Them. The very pattern-book of ease and flop-fringed assurance.

Ashley died cursing the name and the very thought of Ned Maddstone.

Simon Cotter locked his office door and descended the stairs three at a time, slapping his thigh as he went.

‘Three!’ he whispered.

Albert and the others were still crowded around the television. They turned expectantly as Simon approached.

‘I couldn’t raise him on the phone,’ he said. ‘He must have disconnected himself. Oh look, the BBC is being coy, have you tried Sky News?’

Albert found the remote control and they all gazed up at the screen as live pictures played of a stretcher being rushed through the smashed front door of Barson?-Garland’s London town house.

Simon made a note to himself to call the editor of the LEP first thing. There was much to be attended to: an obituary, a new Voice of Reason — so many little things.

Oliver Delft took his pulse while running on the spot. Ninety-eight, not bad. He blew out five or six times and looked round the square, allowing his breathing to settle into a calmer rhythm. He did not like his wife to see him even slightly out of breath, so as a rule he would stay on the doorstep until he was able to go back into the house presenting the appearance of a man who has done no more than walk to the post-box and back.

Light was leaking into the sky from the east. Through the trees he could see that one or two of the Balkan embassies had their lights on. On a number of occasions in the past he had surprised his staff by warning them of impending crises, simply on the basis of his observations of ambassadorial windows, an irony that pleased him in this so-called digital age.

Oliver frowned suddenly. A car was parked in the bay next to his. A silver Lexus that did not bear diplomatic plates. He could see the broad silhouette of an enormously fat driver sitting at the wheel. He made a note of the number and fished for his latchkey.

The first sign that alerted him to something strange afoot in the house was the sound of the children’s laughter. Oliver’s brood were never merry at the breakfast table. They slouched over their cereal, sulkily reading the packets or groaning for the radio to be turned off in favour of the television. The second sign of unusual goings on was the smell of bacon hanging in the hallway. Oliver was following a strict low fat diet and Julia had been a vegetarian all her life. The children, although the youngest was now thirteen, were still addicted to Coco Pops and Frosties.

Oliver heard a man s voice as he approached the kitchen. Bugger, he thought to himself. Uncle Bloody Jimmy.

Julia’s brother Jimmy was a favourite with the children but, as so often with those that children take to, adults found him a complete bore. The time would fit, Oliver realised, glancing at his watch. Uncle Jimmy often ‘dropped by’ early in the morning, after his flight from America had landed and he had a few hours to fill before the business world woke up. At least his arrival cleared up the mystery of the Lexus and chauffeur parked outside. Oliver prepared a welcoming face and opened the kitchen door.

If he had been asked to compile a list of a thousand people he might expect to see sitting at his kitchen table performing magic tricks for the benefit of his family, the dot.com billionaire Simon Cotter would not have featured anywhere.

‘There you are, darling!’ said his wife.

Cotter looked up and smiled. ‘Good morning, Sir Oliver. You must excuse me for barging in on your family like this. So early too. I was passing on my way to the airport and took a chance on your being in. Been for a run?’

Oliver, acutely aware of his tracksuit and headband and for no good reason embarrassed by them, nodded.

‘It’s a great pleasure to see you, Mr Cotter. If you’ll let me shoot upstairs and change...’

‘Come on, Simon. Where is it?’

India, the youngest, had grabbed Simon’s hand and was feeling up his sleeve and tugging at his beard.

‘Ah, now. Where would you like it to be? Would you like it to be under the sugar bowl, perhaps? In the toast rack? Inside the newspaper?’

‘Under the sugar bowl.’

‘Well, then. Have a look.’

‘Bloody hell!’

Oliver was amazed to see that Rupert, back from Oxford and tiresomely sophisticated these days, was as wide-eyed and wriggling as the others.

‘Another! Do another!’

By the time Oliver came downstairs again they were in the middle of a mind-reading trick. Even Oliver’s mother, sitting slightly apart in her wheelchair, appeared to be enjoying herself, if the quantity of dribble sliding from the corners of her mouth could be regarded as a reliable index.

Julia, the children and Maria had all drawn shapes on pieces of paper and were clustered around Cotter, who put a finger dramatically to each temple and stared downwards with a great frown.

‘The great Cottini must think. He must theeeenk ... aïeee ... no desme la lata!’ he muttered to himself. Oliver was surprised to see Maria giggle. She said something in Spanish and Cotter replied fluently.

‘My spirit guide, he has advised me,’ he announced, after turning his face in turn to each of the giggling, hot-faced children. ‘Olivia, because she is vairrry clever and vairrry beautiful, she would be choosing a fine horse, yes? You have drawed a horse, I am fancying.’

Olivia unfolded her piece of paper to reveal a competently drawn horse.

‘It’s a pony, actually,’ she said.

Cotter slapped his forehead. ‘Ah, I am so stupid! Of course it is a pony. Not horse! Pony! Forgive me, child, my powers are weak in the mornings. Let me consider now, Hoolia. Hoolia will choose I think a napple. Yes. Of this I am quite sure. A napple. Half eaten.’

Julia opened her paper and the kitchen rocked with delighted laughter.

‘Good. We make progress, yes? Now we come to Rupert. Rupert is most spiritual. He does not know this yet, but he is most spiritual person in room. He chooses I think a fireplace, which is for him a symbol of his heart, which burns greatly.’

‘That is unbe-fucking-lievable!’

‘Rupert!’

‘Sorry, Mother, but how the hell?’

‘Now, as for India. India is also great beauty, India is wise, India is cleverer than all her brothers and sisters combined together...’

Oliver exchanged a look with his wife. She beamed and he nodded back with a small smile.

'... so India, she would choose an object most deceiving, I think. What would be most deceiving, I must ask myself? Nothing. Nothing would be the most deceiving and wicked thing of all. Show me your paper, oh deceiving and wicked person.

Blushing, India unfolded a blank piece of paper to tremendous applause.

‘Finally, Señorita Maria. What shall we say she draws? Maria is a good woman. Maria is kind. Maria is holy. Maria will draw a chicken, I think, which is a holy creature of God, like herself.’

Dropping her paper and crossing herself, Maria babbled in Spanish, to which Cotter replied in a fluent stream. She kissed him and fluttered from the room, giggling.

‘One more, please, one more!’

Cotter looked up at Oliver and smiled. ‘I’m afraid I have to have a few words with your father now,’ he said.

‘Business!’ he whispered to them privately and gave a hollow groan.

The children groaned back and made him promise to visit again.

‘We’ll go up here,’ Oliver led Simon upstairs. ‘We shan’t be disturbed.’

‘Tremendous place,’ Simon said looking round approvingly.

‘It’s my mother’s, actually.’

‘Ah.’

Oliver saw that Cotter was looking with interest at the stair-lift. ‘She had a series of strokes some years ago. Mind’s all there but...'

‘Very sad. And Maria looks after her?’

‘That’s right. Come in here.’

‘Thank you. What a charming room. You have a wonderful family, Sir Oliver. Something rare these days.’

‘Just Oliver, please. Well, I have to say you bring out the best in them. I’m sorry to repeat their badgering, but how the hell does that trick work?’

‘Ah, well,’ Simon tapped his sunglasses. ‘I provided the paper they drew upon. Very dull chemistry, I’m afraid. Nothing more. Sort of trickery you MI6 boys used all the time in the old days, I expect. Promise not to tell them?’

‘You have my word. But...’

‘Yes?’

‘What you said about India being cleverer than the others. It’s true, but how could you possibly tell?’

‘It’s perfectly obvious. It’s much easier to hide stupidity than brains. Surely you know that?’

‘Well, you’ve certainly scored a hit. Please, sit down.’

‘Thank you. You must be wondering why I’m here.’

Oliver, who had been biting his tongue with curiosity for the past fifteen minutes, shrugged amiably. ‘It’s a surprise, certainly. A pleasant one, I assure you.’

‘Mm. I’m afraid my ways of doing business are a little unorthodox, as you may know.’

‘New rules for a new industry.’

‘Exactly. I’ll be absolutely direct with you. As you may know, CotterDotCom has had to dispense with the services of its head of internet security.’

‘Cosima Kretschmer?’

‘A grim affair. The woman is being treated by many as a kind of cyberhero, but as I have made clear, she acted entirely without the company’s authority.’

‘I understand that Barson-Garland’s family is suing?’

‘I have satisfied their lawyer that all Cosima’s research was undertaken on her own time, not the company’s. The action is now solely against her. She is in hiding somewhere. Germany, they believe. I fear that Mrs Garland will find it difficult to win so much as a penny from her. After all, it seems that the allegations were far from baseless. A sad business.’

‘Hm... I have to confess it was quite the most riveting evening’s television I have ever experienced.’

‘You knew Barson-Garland quite well, I believe?’

Oliver studied his fingers and picked a sliver of skin from under a nail. ‘Knew him? Yes, I knew him. I wouldn’t say well, exactly.’

‘Rumour has it that he was trying to recruit you as an ally for his Security Agency. That he’d promised you the job of heading it up, if it were ever to get off the ground.’

‘Really? I —'

Oliver turned his head at the sound of a sudden creak on the stair. He strode quickly across the room and opened the door.

‘Ah, Maria, how can we help?’

‘I’m sorry disturbing you, Sir Oliver. I woss wunnering if you or Señor Cotter like maybe some cop of coffee? Or some bisskiss? I have bake yesty some bisskiss. I come in.

Oliver stood uncomfortably by the fireplace while Maria cleared away piles of art books and magazines from the coffee table to make space for her tray. Cotter chattered away to her in Spanish and she left the room, simpering like a schoolgirl.

‘Lace on the tray!’ said Oliver, closing the door. ‘You’ve scored quite a hit there too. I seem to remember reading in some magazine or other that you are fluent in nine languages. Can that be true?’

‘Thing of it is,’ said Simon, helping himself to a biscuit, ‘I spent so much time learning languages that I never learned to count, so I couldn’t tell you how many I speak.’

Oliver smiled dryly.

‘You’re probably wondering,’ Simon went on, ‘—absolutely delicious biscuits by the way, simply melt in the mouth — how on earth I could know that Barson-Garland had been trying to seduce you.’

‘That question had crossed my mind.’

‘I haven’t bugged the tables or bribed the Thursday waiters at Mark’s Club, no need to worry about that. No, the fact is that dear old Barson-Garland was also flirting with me. Bit of a two-timing whore, that one.’

‘I see.’

‘He wasn’t sure whether to go public or private, you see. His instincts were actually quite sound in that respect. Which way will the world go? Some think that governments should oversee the formation of a global internet police force. Many are afraid that this is exactly what will happen and scream about privacy and civil liberties. You are probably aware that the recent spate of viruses, worms, mail-bombs and portal attacks has led the international community to one inevitable and irrevocable conclusion. They can’t do anything about it. Nothing will work. It’s too expensive. It’s too impractical. The legal ramifications of borders, copyright treaties and so on are complex and insoluble. The only answer is for private enterprise, at local corporate levels, to do its own policing, its own firewalling, its own vaccinating and prophylaxis. Only the private sector can cross the borders, only the private sector has the resources and the power to take the responsibility. The post of Head of internet Security at CotterDotCom takes on a greater meaning than ever before. Frankly, even if Cosima had not gone mad I would still be offering you this position. That, if you had not guessed, is what I am doing. It’s frankly the same job that Ashley Barson-Garland offered you, but it’s bigger, it’s real, it’s now, it’s free of political interference and it carries embarrassingly good pay. I do need an answer soon, however. I’m off to Africa later this morning and I’d love to know that you can start work as soon as you’ve cleared it with your people ... in the meantime, I’m absolutely dying for a slash. You couldn’t...?’

‘Oh, yes. Of course. Through there, second door on the right.’

‘Do try one of those biscuits. So light. They can’t do your diet the least bit of harm.’

Simon left the room and crossed the landing as directed. As he passed the stairs he noticed that the stair-lift had moved from the bottom of the staircase to the top. A half open door caught Simon’s eye and he pushed it open and went in.

Alone and immobile, Oliver Delft’s mother sat on a wheelchair facing a window that overlooked the Square. Simon came and stood beside her. Her eyes rolled up towards him. It seemed to Simon that her face was capable of showing some expression, for he thought he detected a gleam of surprised pleasure.

‘Philippa Blackrow,’ he whispered. ‘How strange to meet you. I’m Ned Maddstone. Do you know that you are responsible for the destruction of my life? Do you know that because of you I spent twenty years imprisoned in an insane asylum? Twenty years because of you and your cunt of a son.

Breath hissed and bubbled from Philippa’s lungs and he could sense the strain in her as she tried to mobilise her sagging cheeks and drooping mouth into some shape that might move towards speech. Saliva ran from her lips and her clawed and wasted hands shook like dried leaves in a storm.

‘I was to have delivered a letter to you. From your Fenian friends. Of all the people in the world, it was your son who intercepted it. That is how cruel fate can be. To protect you and to save his own worthless skin he hid me away to rot amongst the mad for ever. And now I have come back. I am much crueller than fate. I thought you should know that. Infinitely more cruel. They tell me that inside this lifeless carcass your mind is fully active. Now it has something to ponder on for the rest of its days. Goodbye.’

The last picture of Philippa that Simon took away with him was of a mother down whose withered cheeks tears were flowing. He did not see, as he flushed the lavatory and crossed the landing to return to Oliver, that her mouth was trying to force itself into a smile and he could not know that the tears dropping from her eyes were tears of joy.

Albert banged into the house and called out from the bottom of the stairs.

‘Mum! Dad! Where are you?’

Only after he had yelled three times and heard no reply did he realise that Gordon and Portia would be out picking up his grandfather to bring him back for supper. That was the very reason for Albert leaving work so early, but the horrors of the tube journey had banished all such thoughts from his mind. He stormed angrily into the kitchen at the sound of the phone, swung his bag viciously onto the kitchen table, not caring if he cracked the screen of his laptop and pushed the phone off its hook, letting the receiver dangle down and bang against the wall. Java the cat wound around his ankles and he kicked him away.

‘Shit,’ he yelled. ‘Shit on everything. Shit you all. Shit, shit, shit.’

Breathing heavily through his nostrils, he took the newspaper from his jacket, sat down at the table and read the article for the twelfth time. Java sat coldly in the corner, ignoring him with great dignity.

CAFÉ UNETHICA

A coffee scandal was brewing in the world of ‘ethical trading’ this morning, when it was revealed exclusively to the London Evening Press that Gordon Fendeman, founder of Café Ethica and darling of New Labour and the eco-conscious chattering classes, had cheated an entire African community out of their land rights and destroyed the way of life of a whole people in order to start up his business. The so-called ‘co-operatives’ that Café Ethica claims to be supporting were actually, according to sources on the ground, bussed in from a tribe two hundred miles to the east of the plantation. Sources say that this was the result of a corrupt arrangement made between Fendeman (41) and the local government, which is composed entirely of the rival, majority tribe.

These disclosures will rock the rapidly expanding world of ethical commodities and cast fresh doubt on New Labour’s business judgement. Only two weeks ago, the Prime Minister in a speech to the City referred to Fendeman’s enterprise as a ‘beacon of light that led the way to new ways of trading with the Third World’, words which he must now be bitterly regretting.

Reports say that Fendeman, who is married to art historian Portia Fendeman, struck a deal in 1998 with the minority tribal leaders, who turned down a lucrative offer from a worldwide consortium in order to do business with Fendeman’s new company. They were led to believe that a deal with Café Ethica would be in their best interests, offering profit sharing, improved working conditions and the promise of a secure future for their people. They were horrified to discover that the terms of this contract in fact allowed Fendeman to evict them from land they had owned for countless generations and replace them with workers from another part of the country. These displaced people now face a future of starvation, disease and homelessness in a country where their tribe has few enough rights.

Fendeman’s personal profits from the local government deal that kicked these people off their land and from the growing sales of Café Ethica products have been calculated to exceed one million pounds a year. Comment, Page 12

The ‘comment’ on page twelve was unspeakable, just unspeakable. Albert felt that his whole world was crashing down around him. It seemed impossible to separate the various strands of his despair.

His father. How could such a thing be written. How dared they? It must be lies. He knew his father too well to believe anything else. But it would hurt him so deeply. He was a proud man. Whatever the outcome, mud would stick.

His work: for five months, Albert had been toiling away in the field of Ethical Trading. He had broken new ground and achieved great things. He was proud of what he was doing and how it would help the world. Something like this, however deeply untrue it so manifestly was, would dwell in the mind of the public for ever. The consumer’s hand would start to close around a product whose labelling contained the word ‘ethical’ and then draw back as if stung. ‘Oh yes,’ they would say to themselves. ‘Wasn’t there some nasty fuss about these types of companies? Better stick to Nescafé.’ And all that good work would be undone.

Simon: The London Evening Press was his newspaper. He was a busy man, of course. Albert had never seen a man with such a capacity for work and detail. Only yesterday, in a wine bar, Albert had been boasting about him to his friends. He had used the very word ‘detail’ time and time again in describing Simon’s awesome abilities. It was the quality that always marked out the great: their grasp on detail. And that was the problem. Albert could not imagine for a moment that Simon, however busy he was, could ever have been unaware of the LEP’s attack on Gordon. He must have known. But if he had known then how could he have allowed it? Not to warn Albert, not to take him aside and break the news. The same friends that Albert had talked to when raving on and on about him had been cynical. ‘Believe me,’ one of them had said. ‘No one makes that kind of money without being a complete son of a bitch deep down.’ ‘You’re wrong, so wrong!’ Albert had insisted. But a memory returned to him now of the strange sensation he had felt standing next to him while they watched the public destruction of Ashley Barson-Garland on television. There had been nothing in Simon’s expression that Albert could pin down, but none the less he had been aware of a feeling. An atmosphere. Intense waves had radiated from Simon that Albert had tried to push to the back of his mind. It had been like smelling fear, or sexual desire, or guilt, yet it had been none of those things. It had been something else. And the rumours that had flown throughout the company. Cosima? Acting independently? Getaway! She couldn’t take a pee without Cotter’s say-so, let alone appear on TV. Albert had dismissed all that as office gossip. Maybe though, maybe there was something about Simon. If Albert inspected his feelings honestly, maybe... maybe what he had smelt that night had been cruelty.

Gordon was his father. Ethical Trading was his life. Simon was his god. Fathers are weak. Life is a betrayal. Gods are cruel. Albert had read enough and seen enough to know these as objective facts, but he had not expected to experience them quite so soon and all at once. All three had been taken away from him in a single blow of fate. One minute he had been cheerfully sitting on the tube, listening to music and skimming through the evening paper — he only bought that bloody paper because it was Simon’s — and the next minute the triple pillars of his world had crumbled.

He rose from the table at the sound of the front door.

‘Where is he? Where’s my grandson?’

Albert folded up the newspaper and slipped it back into his pocket. ‘I’m in the kitchen, Grandpa. Grabbing some food before you get it all.’

‘Cheeky! The boy is so cheeky. Don’t you love him?’ Albert adored his grandfather. He was a constant reminder to him of his Jewishness and his heritage. It was hard to believe what his parents told him, that many years ago Grandpa had been a history lecturer and local politician. Rabidly left wing, Portia said, which was hard to imagine. Something had happened, Albert never quite got to the bottom of it, something to do with a wrongful arrest, but Peter had left academia and thrown himself into religion and the local synagogue. Theirs was a tight knit family, by definition. As the son of cousins, Albert had long endured the amusement of his friends at the circumstance of his grandfather also being his great-uncle and all the teasing suggestions of genetic weakness that went with it, but he loved his family and enjoyed the special closeness that came from not having two warring factions within it. No in-law jokes for the Fendemans.

He embraced his grandfather and saw, over his shoulder, that Portia and Gordon knew nothing.

‘So, my darlings. What’s to eat?’

‘You’ll see, Daddy, you’ll see.’ Portia laughed as she kissed her father and her son. ‘You look worried, darling, what is it?’

‘Nothing, Mum, nothing. Tough day at the office.’

Albert knew that it was not going to be a hard decision

after all. Blood was thicker than worship. This was his family. They counted more than any hero. After all, there was Oxford. It wasn’t too late. It was never too late.

‘Hey, the phone’s off the hook.’

‘Leave it, Dad. No, leave it, really. It’s Friday night. The sun has set. No work. No calls.’

Peter put a hand to his grandson’s cheek. ‘Love him! Couldn’t you just eat him up? Am I right?’

Albert lit the candles and drew the curtains. He knew that soon enough the house would be under siege.

‘Welcome aboard, Oliver. I know we’ve both made the right decision. If you like I’ll walk you round the place, introduce you to a few people. How are you on heights?’

‘Heights?’

‘There’s a fabulous office at the top of the building, one of the best views in London, but if you prefer, you can make your habitation a little closer to ground.’

‘No, no. Heights are good.’

‘Of course you’re used to a view aren’t you? As a matter of fact, you can see your old office from my window here. Would you like to wave to your successor?’

‘Frankly no,’ said Oliver. ‘It’s only when you’ve shaken the dust of public service from your shoes that you realise how much you always hated it. By the way, my children will kill me if I forget to pass on an invitation to dinner next week. Thursday, can you make it?’

‘It would be a pleasure, please convey my grateful thanks. Now, let’s amble, shall we? Ah, good morning, Albert. Let me introduce you to Sir Oliver Delft. Anti-virus, anti-worm, anti-hacker.’

‘How do you do? Simon, I have to talk to you right now. It’s extremely urgent.’

‘Ah. Oliver, I’m so sorry, would you mind if I...?’

‘No, no. If it’s all right with you, I’ll wander on my own. I’d prefer it that way. I take it this pass allows me anywhere?’

‘Absolutely anywhere. Introduce yourself as you go along, I broke the glad tidings to everyone by email this morning.’

‘I will see you later then.’

‘Albert, I have a very strong idea why you are here. Let me say —‘How could you do it? How?’

‘I’m the publisher, Albert, not the editor. I can’t be seen to interfere in .

‘Oh buhshit, that’s absolute bullshit. I’m not an idiot. And this, here, in today’s Times, have you seen? They are claiming that my father bought LEP shares the day before you announced that you were buying it and that he was acting on inside information. That was me! The first day I came here you told me you were buying the paper and I ... I happened to mention it to him. I didn’t know it meant anything. And now they are painting him as some sort of crook. He’s not. He’s my father. He’s a decent man. What are you doing to him?’

‘Albert, calm down. I’m sure this will all come out right in the end.’

‘Anyway, I — I came here to tell you that I’m leaving.’

‘But Albert, that’s absurd.’

‘It’s a matter of... of... honour. I can’t possibly work for you. You’re my enemy. It’s family honour. We’re going to clear his name if it takes every penny we have. I’m going to expose you for what you are. A wrecker of lives. An animal. I’ll make your life hell. Goodbye.’

‘Albert, this is nothing more than absurd posturing. Dry your eyes. Come back.’

Albert had been in his room for nine days. The pages were uploading. The world would soon know the kind of man Simon Cotter truly was. He had collected together every morsel of gossip, every hint, rumour and theory that had ever been whispered on the subject of his mortal enemy. More would come, that was the nature of the internet. It wouldn’t matter if his subject was Mother Teresa, there would be people out there with scandal, conspiracy theories and reasons to hate. Albert had the advantage of knowing things. Nothing too terrible, but enough to make Cotter a figure of fun.

Albert watched the final page upload. He had chosen a free webserver in Australia. It made no difference really, but the site might as well be lodged as far away as possible. It gave the impression that Cotter’s enemies were spread around the globe. When he got to Oxford next month he would continue his campaign. They might have taken Wafiq Said’s money, but they’d never accept Cotter’s, not once Albert had done his work. Simon Cotter. The arrogance of him. The vain casual arrogance.

‘Albert! Let me in. Please .

Why not? His mother should see that he hadn’t just been sulking like Achilles in his tent. He had been arming and preparing for battle.

‘Okay, Mum. It’s a bit of a mess I’m afraid.’

Albert got up from his chair and unlocked the door. Portia was standing with a tray in her hand.

‘For goodness’ sake! What have you been doing in there?’

‘Yeah, I know. I’ve been busy. Hiya, Java.’

Portia trod gingerly in and stood in the middle of the room and swayed slightly as if she were about to lose her balance. ‘Where on earth am I going to put this tray?

‘Um... down there.’ Albert kicked away a pile of CDs, photographs and underwear. ‘Get away Java!’

Java had leapt onto the desk and was batting at the mouse, as cats will.

‘Lunch,’ said Portia firmly. ‘In fact it’s last night’s supper and this morning’s breakfast too. You absolutely must eat. I’m going to watch you. I don’t care if I sound like the worst Jewish mother in the world. You simply must eat.’

‘Yeah, yeah. Whatever. Look, Mum...’

‘Don’t you “whatever” me! I’m going to watch every sandwich going down your throat. And then sleep. You didn’t go to bed at all last night, did you?’

‘Okay, okay ... only, look.’ Albert grinned. ‘You’ve arrived at a historic moment. The formal opening of the world’s first anti-Cotter site. Watch this.’

Albert sat down at this computer again and his mouse started skating.

‘See? www.ihatecotter.co.au. Here’s the welcome page. “Welcome to my parlour.” That’s Cotter in the centre of this web, I’ve made him look like a spider. You move the mouse over the spider and he scuttles from one part of his web to the other. When you click, it tells you about each part, see? And you can look at different areas, like cupboards in the parlour? Here’s a “Slap Cotter” page. When you click over his face, he gets slapped and it plays this sound. Hang on.’

The cartoon sound of a ringing slap came from the computer speakers followed by a treble ‘ouch!’

‘Pinched them from the Simpsons actually, but what?ever. There’s a gossip page. As people log on they can add their own stories. See? I’ve put in stuff like “he only drinks milk”, “he dyes his hair”. He’s trying to buy into the establishment. He’s been giving money to St Mark’s in Oxford. To the MCC as well, so he can jump the queue and become a member, so I’ve got links to the official MCC and St Mark’s sites so real members can campaign against him from within.’

‘Darling, you can’t do this. He’ll sue.'

‘Let him. Let him bloody sue. That would be brilliant. How would it look? Suing a seventeen-year-old whose father he has been smearing in his papers? I don’t think so. Even if he got some sort of injunction or whatever, imagine what it would start. You know what the net is like. His name would be mud in days. He’d be the hate figure of all time. Share price would go frrfrfrfrffrfrrr... Check this out, this is a page of Conspiracy theories. Cosima Kretschmer, okay? This says how she was acting under orders to expose Barson-Garland. She was his girlfriend. That kind of stuff. Oh, and you’ll love this. Here’s a page of photos with him bald ... you know like that kids’ magnet man with the iron filings? You can give him beards and moustaches and different hair colours to see if he’s actually a wanted criminal or something. You never know, someone may recognise him. That’s the thing about Simon Bloody Cotter. Nobody knows who he is. Maybe he’s a Nazi war criminal. Tell you what, let’s make him Aryan blond...’

‘Darling, he’s a bit young to be...’

Portia broke off, very suddenly. Albert turned to look at her. She was staring at the screen, absolutely transfixed.

‘You look like you’ve seen a ghost, Mum. What is it?’

Portia closed her eyes for a second.

‘Mum?’

‘Come on, let’s see you eat those sandwiches, right now.

‘Yeah, yeah. But what do you think?’

Portia leant forward and kissed her son, amazed that she could speak so calmly. ‘It’s brilliant of course, darling. I can’t begin to imagine how you could do such a thing.’

‘Should I show it to Dad?’

‘Not just at the minute, my love.’

‘Is he...? Where is he?’

‘Here, in the dining-room. He’s in good shape, don’t worry. There’s a board meeting next week. They want to give him a chance to explain. He’s preparing his.., his...’

‘Defence?’

‘Well, it’s not quite like that. The board believes him completely.’

‘I should bloody well hope so.’ Now that Albert had started eating he found that he was extremely hungry. ‘Top sandwiches, Mum.’

‘But there’s obviously a lot of pressure from shareholders.’

‘He’s never going to resign?’

‘Well he thinks it may be in the best interests of the company. Its reputation and share price.

‘But that’s like saying he’s guilty! He can’t resign!’

‘Well, that’s the point of the board meeting. To find a way of his stepping down that doesn’t look like an admission of guilt. The whole board wants to help. Do you want me to make you some more?’

‘These are fine. Thanks, Mum.’

‘All right. I’m going out now. I shall —‘ Portia cleared her throat to hide the tremble in her voice ‘— I’ll be back later and I expect to find you in bed, asleep. You understand?’ She leant forward and kissed him, clenching her fists to cover the shaking. ‘I do love you very much. You know that, don’t you?’

Albert had turned back to his screen and he replied through a mouthful of chicken sandwich. ‘Love you too, Mum. Love you too. Hey, look! I’ve already got an email from someone. Look at that, it’s got an attachment. “I hate Cotter too.” Wonder what it is.

Albert double-clicked. Instantly the screen went black.

‘What the fuck?’

A ribbon of bright red text chugged along the screen.

YOU WANT A DUEL? YOU’VE GOT IT.

ALL FILES INFECTED. GOODBYE.

‘No ... no!’ Albert switched his computer off and started it again.

‘Darling, what’s happening?’

‘It’s him, it’s him! He’s sent me a fucking virus. I can’t believe it. He’s destroyed the whole system. Oh, Jesus.’

‘But he can’t have done...’

‘He must be running a permanent search. He’s found the Australian site and knows it’s from me. Shit!’

‘All right, Albert. Calm down.’

‘I’ve still got my laptop. He can’t touch that. I’ll start again. Do it even better. Take it to a cybercafé. This is just the fucking beginning. Everyone’s equal on the net.’

‘Albert...

‘Can’t talk, Mum. Work to do.’

Portia closed the door and walked slowly to the kitchen.

The whole terrible truth had come crashing into her mind.

Ashley and Rufus Cade. She should have made the connection before and been on her guard. Ashley and Rufus Cade. And Gordon next.

A noise like a farmer turning hay with a pitchfork came through the kitchen hatchway. Gordon was sitting at the dining-room table shuffling through a heap of faxes. Portia thought she had never seen him looking so energised and alive. She preferred not to remember the dread she sometimes saw in his eyes.

‘We will fight on until my husband’s name is cleared.’

How many times had she heard that over the years from the spouses of Aitken, Hamilton, Archer, Clinton, Nixon and countless others who had faced scandal while their wives ‘stood by them’?

She knew that Gordon was not a wicked man. Like most people, he was a child anxious to be loved and like most men, a boy desperate to prove himself in the world. She could picture him doing so many bad things for so many good reasons. He had spent most of his life trying to catch up: A second choice husband living off the earnings of a wife who had married him out of pity and her own despair. At the start of their marriage everything had come from Hillary’s money. Portia had been the brilliant young student with the doctorate and academic tenure, Gordon had been the American outsider who never quite managed to fit in. Ten years of bluff talk to friends had taken their toll on his pride.

‘I’m in the financial advisor game at the moment.’ He was selling endowment mortgages on commission. Somehow worse, in Portia’s opinion, than double-glazing or herbal remedies.

‘A franchise opportunity has opened up. Looking at that quite keenly. Quite keenly.’ He considered managing a Seattle style coffee bar.

‘Business consultancy, as matter of fact.’ Nothing.

‘Broking soft commodities.’ Trading in coffee futures on the residue left by Hillary after she died. And losing it too.

And one last throw. The idea had come from Portia in fact, though he chose not to remember it. She had heard a programme on the radio about the low world prices being fetched for tea and coffee, a subject Gordon had been kvetching about for years.

‘Darling, I know it’s tough for you that the prices are rock bottom. But what about the pickers?’

‘Yes, well, obviously it’s tough for them too.’

‘Surely lots of people in the west would be prepared to pay extra for coffee and tea if they thought it would benefit the third world?’

‘That’s a brilliant idea, Mum.’

‘It seems to make sense.’

‘Porsh, it doesn’t quite work like that —‘

‘What about it, Dad?’

‘I remember,’ Portia had continued. ‘Peter used to make us buy Nicaraguan coffee. To support the revolution and thumb a nose at America. You could buy it everywhere. Collett’s bookshop, health stores, those sort of places. They used to advertise it in the New Statesman. Peter even put posters up in Hampstead library.’

‘Sure, it sounds all very well in theory...’

‘Why did you call Grandpa Peter?’

‘Did I, darling? It’s worth thinking about though, Gordon, don’t you think?’

Finally he had achieved something. Success on his own terms.

Portia put her head through the hatch.

‘Gordon, I’ve got to go out for an hour or so. Got everything you need?’

‘Going fine, Porsh. Going fine. A lot of good evidence coming in from Africa, South America, Indonesia. It’s looking good.’

Portia smiled and gave a thumbs up. She had long thought that there was a melancholy air of desolation that hung over dining-rooms that were seldom used for dining. Gordon had spread papers on that table before and never with any good result. The smell of furniture polish and candle wax reminded Portia of death. Dead flies had been candied and preserved in the lips of a half empty port decanter and cobwebs furred the dried flowers and fir cones in the fireplace. She remembered when the mirror over the sideboard had been draped with black cloth. Peter, Albert and Gordon, their neckties ripped, had sat Shiva for Hillary on low wooden stools, Albert’s face so solemn and white that she had wanted to cover it in kisses and hug him close to her. Peter had stayed there the full seven days, mourning his wife and perhaps also the atheism and contempt for ritual of his only daughter. There was no hope to be had from dining-rooms. None at all.

Simon had enjoyed a busy morning on the telephone. He looked down at the To Do List on his Palm Pilot.

Letter to St Mark’s √

John √

Floyd √

Drapers √

Estate Agents √

Mbinda √

(Hotel?) √

Albert √

CE Shares √

DM √

As far as he could tell he was up to speed and on top of everything. He considered leaving early and visiting the nets at Lords for a little cricket practice. A small part of him, looking at the checklist, had whispered the terrible word ‘boredom’ to him. Soon, it would all be over.

Simon swore at himself heartily in Russian. Then in Swedish. A man of his capacity would never be bored. The idea was absurd. He could be anything he wanted to be. Writer. Inventor. Translator. Statesman. Broadcaster. Philanthropist. Collector. Playboy. If he was never bored in a small room in a hospital on a remote island in the Kattegat, how could he imagine being bored when the whole world was his playground?





THE STARS’




His desk phone rang and he pressed the monitor button.

‘Mmhm?’

‘I’m so sorry, Simon. I know you said no calls. There’s a woman here. She says you’ll definitely want to see her. I wouldn’t pay any attention, only it’s Albert’s mother. I wasn’t sure if maybe...’

‘One moment.'

He pressed the monitor button again. His plans were so complete, so absolute, so thoroughly thought through. He had not expected this visit, but naturally he had considered it. He was ready.

‘Very well, Lily. Show her in.’

Simon rose from his desk and moved round to the sitting area.

‘Mrs Fendeman, do come in. Coffee? No, of course not. I’m sorry, that was ... water, perhaps? Fruit juice?’

‘A glass of water would be fine.’

‘Would you, Lily? Thanks. Sit down, please, Mrs Fendeman. Tell me how I can help you.

Portia sat down. She found it hard to raise her head and look into his eyes.

‘I think you know what you can do, Mr Cotter. You can leave my family alone.’

Simon dropped into the armchair opposite. ‘Oh dear,’ he said. ‘This is terribly difficult. Before you say anything else, let me tell you that I have absolutely no wish to hurt your son. He’s a very fine, very intelligent boy. You should be proud of him.’

‘I am proud of him. I don’t need your endorsement.’

‘Of course not.'

‘I notice,’ said Portia, ‘that you did not say that you had no wish to hurt my husband.’

‘Mrs Fendeman, it’s very important that you try to understand the complex relationship that exists between a newspaper publisher and his editorial staff.’

‘Oh please...’

‘Ah, thank you, Lily. That’s fine. Definitely no calls now, okay? Thanks, love.’

Simon watched her pour the water into a glass. She looked across at him and gave a sad half-smile.

‘If I hadn’t known when I came in, I would have known now,’ she said.

‘Excuse me?’

‘That habit of jogging your knee up and down. I can see you as you were. A little lost boy.’

Simon stood up. He took a deep breath. ‘Oh Portia,’ he said. ‘Portia. I can’t tell you what...’ He started to pace up and down the room. ‘I went to a lecture you gave last April. I have watched you in your kitchen, from the street. That same house in Plough Lane. I’ve read your books. I’ve seen your light in Albert’s eyes. But to have you here. It’s very.

‘There is no light in Albert’s eyes. Not any more. You’ve put it out.’

Simon had no wish to be side-tracked down paths opened up by Portia. ‘I suppose it was that page on his website, was it? I had a go too. Gave myself blond hair. Rather frightening. That’s what told you, is it? Or did you know before?’

‘I’m really not sure. I had only seen you on television and in magazines. There was something in my mind. A distrust. A worry, I suppose...'

‘A distrust?’ Simon came and sat down opposite her again. ‘How can you say distrust?’

‘An uncomfortable feeling. It should have been distrust. Please, Ned. I don’t want to talk to you about anything but my family. My son.

‘He should have been my son!’

‘But he isn’t. Half of him is Gordon, half of him is me. None of him is you.’

‘I know. I know. I thought ... it crossed my mind ... maybe you had lied about his age. Maybe he was actually two years older. Maybe he was conceived...’

‘There go those knees again...

Simon stood up. ‘But I realise that he is Gordon’s. What you have to understand,’ he started pacing again, ‘is what happened to me. What they did to me.’

‘Ashley, Gordon and Rufus. I know what they did to you.

‘You know? How could you possibly know? There isn’t the slightest possibility you could know.’

‘Gordon told me.’

Simon stopped and turned. ‘He told you?’ He resumed his pacing. ‘Yes. I see. He told you. I suppose that makes sense. You realised who I am and you told him. He confessed all and sent you to me. It makes sense.

‘You may know many things, Mr Cotter, but... ‘Portia, please. You know my name. Use it.’ ‘You may know many things, Mr Cotter,’ persisted Portia, ‘you may speak many languages, run many businesses and control many lives, but you do not know the first thing about people. Gordon told me years ago. Years ago. Around the time Albert was born in fact. It had been preying on his mind like a tumour. He had watched me go into the hospital and talk to your father day after day after day and he knew that he was responsible. It burned him up. He loved me, you see. He never stopped trying to find you. I gave up long before he did.’

‘That was certainly a clever way to win you. I never doubted his brains.'

‘Well you should have done, he hasn’t many. A good heart, but no brains. Look at the mess he’s in.’

‘Mess? Look at the mess that African tribe is in. A good heart?’

‘Oh, for heaven’s sake. You don’t want a debate about moral responsibility do you? Do we prefer to treat Africans like children? When they hurt their own, must it always be our fault? Was he more wicked than the government that actually did the deed? More wicked because he’s white and “should know better” than those poor helpless little piccaninnies? Yes, it was wrong of him. It’s wrong of us every time we buy a doll made by children in sweat shops. Good, decent, high-minded, liberal men and women once stirred sugar into their coffee knowing it was picked by slaves. You’re wearing leather shoes, one day such an act will be regarded as the height of immorality. We buy things, we live in the world, we’re all involved, all messed up together in the same moral soup. For the love of God, how can you be so arrogant? Can’t you extend a moment’s sympathy to a man floundering in quicksand?’

‘A quicksand of his own making.’

‘That’s what makes it so pitiful still. If it was not his fault he could be like you and wallow in the luxury of divine rage. If fate throws brickbats at you, it’s easy. When they’re your own and they bounce back at you, it’s hopeless. It is his fault, so he ... he pretends. You should see him... he’s so lost. So completely helpless.’ Portia was furious to hear her voice quavering and she knew that there were now visible tears in her eyes.

‘I’m sorry, Portia. Truly sorry.

‘I don’t want your pity, I want your promise. I suppose it’s too late to do anything for Gordon’s reputation, but Albert. Leave him alone. For God’s sake leave him alone.’

‘He’s the one picking the fight,’ said Simon. He was leaning against the opposite wall. ‘If I know him, he’ll be sitting in a cybercafé somewhere with a laptop, using an alias with a free account and not accepting any email for fear of more viruses. It’s quite an intellectual challenge.’

‘He’s a child. You can let go.’

Simon considered the letter he had written to Oxford that morning. A letter that would certainly reverse the college’s decision to accept Albert as an undergraduate.

‘I’m sorry, Portia,’ he said. ‘Everything is in train.

Portia looked at the space above his head. ‘Everything thoroughly thought through, in fact.’

‘One day you’ll understand.’

‘I can’t pretend that I know everything that’s happened to you. But I can see the result. Perhaps you should be thanking Gordon. You have almost boundless wealth and a mind that everyone assures me is terrifying in its breadth, knowledge and power. You seem to have everything that the world covets.'

‘Not you, Portia. I don’t have you. I don’t have your children. I don’t have a family history, a youth.’

‘Whatever had been done to him, do you know how Ned would have reacted? If Gordon had cut his arm off, say, in a fit of rage? Ned would have blushed and stammered and said, “Gosh, that’s all right. My fault, actually. Please don’t worry yourself. Awfully sorry.” That’s how Ned would have dealt with whatever fate had thrown him. With a dazzling smile and an embarrassed shuffle of the feet.'

‘I am Ned and that is not how I reacted.’

‘I don’t know who you are, Mr Cotter, but I can state with absolute assurance that you are not Ned Maddstone. I knew him well, you see.’

‘You will understand. And soon.’ Simon moved towards her. ‘I am not responsible for what is happening. All this will soon be over and you will understand completely. We will have time to talk and remember. You will see that I am merely an instrument. An instrument of God.’

From the doorway Portia shuddered. ‘Oh dear heavens,’ she whispered. ‘You poor man. I’m so sorry.’

Simon stood for while alone in the office, thinking. After a while he called Lily on the internal phone.

‘That post I put out. It hasn’t gone yet, has it?’

‘Still here, Simon.'

‘Bring it in would you? There’s a love.’

He found that he still could not sit down without his knees jiggling up and down, so he leant against the window as he reread the letter to St Mark’s. He laid it on the desk and smiled to himself. It could keep.

Coda

V

Albert and Portia had sat quietly in the kitchen for a quarter of an hour each smelling the residue of Gordon’s fear, neither speaking of it. He had left the house for his board meeting at half past eight.

‘Doesn’t do to look overkeen,’ he had said, cheerfully stuffing papers into his briefcase.

Mother and son were each proud of the other’s hypocrisy. Albert had not imagined Portia capable of a phrase like ‘Go get ‘em, Tiger!’ and she had not thought that the day would ever dawn when Albert would punch his father on the arm and say ‘Attaboy, Dad!’

Gordon had swept out with a brisk nod of the head, as if to show that it was an ordinary day. On ordinary days, as Albert and Portia were all too well aware, he would have kissed them each and said, ‘Time to cast some pearls before swine’, ‘Wish me luck’ or even ‘Yeugh! Another shitty day for our hero.’

While the coffee went cold in their cups and Java howled in vain for admission, Portia had told Albert everything she knew about Ned Maddstone.

‘Why didn’t you tell me this before?’ he had wanted to know. ‘Why didn’t Dad tell me?’

‘I expect we would have told you one day. It didn’t seem ... necessary. But Dad doesn’t know that Ned has come back. And there’s no reason why he should either. I only realised myself the other day. None of us knows what happened to Ned after he disappeared. I don’t suppose we ever shall. But your father worried about him terribly for years. Perhaps he still does. We don’t speak about it.’

‘Do you.., do you still love Ned?’

‘I love your father very much. And I love you.

‘And grandpa.'

‘And grandpa, of course.

‘And Java?’

‘Naturally Java.’

They had both laughed. Portia had squeezed Albert’s hand in appreciation of his lightening her load and he had returned the pressure.

Sitting now in his bedroom with the laptop open and Java on his knees looking in vain for a mouse to swat, he awaited an email. His mother had never answered his question and he supposed that she did still love Simon, Ned ... whatever.

The computer chimed, Albert jumped in his seat and Java leapt crossly from his lap. He saw the letter there in his Inbox.

Simon Cotter Re: Ned

There was no attachment. He didn’t even care if Cotter knew a way of sending viruses by plain email. He moved

his finger along the track-pad and double-clicked with his thumb.

on 10/10/00 09:20 am, Albert Fendeman at aef©anon_anon_anon.co.tm wrote:

>	Dear Mr Cotter

>	My mother has explained things to me, but she

>	has no idea I am writing to you.

>	I am extremely sorry for any pain my father has

>	caused you in the past.

>	I understand why you are doing what you are

>	doing and promise to leave you alone from now

>	on.

>	Thank you for the valuable experience I derived

>	from working with you. I hope everything goes

>	well for you and your company.

>	Please do not stop the good work you are doing

>	in the field of ethical trading.

>	Yours

>	Albert Fendeman

Albert

Thank you for your email. Start up your computer. Ignore the fact that the screen is blank. Press Alt-?Control-Shift N, wait a few seconds and then press Shift-Delete. When prompted, key in the password “Babe” (observe the upper case B). You should find all your files intact.

Enjoy your time at Oxford. If ever you find yourself looking for employment afterwards, you know where to come. A brilliant career awaits you. Live up to your mother’s expectations.

Yours

Simon

PS:	A splendid email address. My directory tells me that tm is Turkmenistan. A fine touch.

Simon Cotter simoncotter@cotdotcom.com

*******************************************

Any opinions expressed in the email are those of the individual and not necessarily the company. This email and any files transmitted with it are confidential and solely for the use of the intended recipient or entity to whom they are addressed. It may contain material protected by attorney-client privilege. If you are not the intended recipient or the person responsible for delivering to the intended recipient, be advised that you have received this email in error and that any use is strictly prohibited. If you have received this email in error please forward this email to housekeeping@cotdotcom.com

This footnote also confirms that although this email message has been swept for the presence of computer viruses, the recipient is responsible for ensuring that the email and contents have been swept and accepted by their own virus protection systems

********************************************

Simon closed his laptop and placed it carefully on the seat beside him.

‘Wait for me, John,’ he said, as he opened the door. ‘I shan’t be long.’

‘Very good, sir.’

Stepping from the car, Simon looked up at the tall building across the street in front of him. He stepped through the battery of cameras, neither looking into their lenses, nor avoiding them.

Half an hour earlier Gordon Fendeman had looked up at the same building in much the same way. He had made the mistake of trying to hold his briefcase up in front of his face as he ran the press gauntlet which only served to make him look simultaneously guilty and absurd.

He had left the house with a sensation in his stomach that he had not experienced for twenty years, since the days of lurking in terror of the police calling with news of Ned Maddstone and a warrant for Gordon’s arrest.

His wife and son hadn’t fooled him with their false joshing and cheery arm-punching at breakfast time. He had seen the dread in their eyes, clear as clear. They disbelieved him. They disbelieved him twice. First, they thought him guilty of a heinous betrayal of ethics and second they had no faith that he possessed the capacity to see this thing through. He had read that distrust in Portia s face. ‘Don’t make it worse, Gordon. Please, don’t make it worse.

The contempt they had for him. It was as though he had the letters F-A-I-L-U-R-E stamped across his forehead. ‘Look at me, I’m a schmuck!’ he wanted to shout at the other passengers in the elevator. ‘I’m a piece of shit. Laugh at me, why don’t you? Help yourself. Everybody else does.’

When he was upset, Gordon still thought to himself in American. It helped him feel more of a person. Maybe... maybe if his parents had not died so early he would have been a success. What kind of upbringing did he have in that Hampstead nut-house, anyway? Damn it, he was still living there. That same dark, dreadful house. He should have moved Porsh and Albie to the States on his passport years ago. For the price of the Plough Lane house he could have bought a place in upstate New York. Ithaca maybe. Albie would’ve grown up American. Portia could’ve gotten a job at the University and Gordon could have achieved there. Americans didn’t have that snobby look in their eyes. That English public school politeness that was like a knife in the guts. The murmuring ‘Gosh, awfully sorry’ and that oh-so self-deprecating smile. Self-deprecating, my ass. They knew who was boss, they knew who was in and who was out.

His family loved him, sure. But what kind of love was it that looked at you like you were a wounded deer? Too scared to say what they’re thinking because they think you’re too scared to hear it. That’s not love, that’s abuse. Abuse, nothing less.

He loved them too, he knew that. He wanted to provide for them, protect them, be loved and adored by them, but he never got the chance. No one had ever asked his advice on the simplest question. Even plumbers and electricians, when they came to the house. They always asked Portia to show them the ring main or the stop-cock, or whatever damned thing. These days they asked Albie. It was like some instinct they had. He could be standing there, in the middle of the room, master of the house, head of the family, but would they ask him if he wanted MDF or plywood? Jesus, the stink of failure he must give off.

His own son was earning more aged seventeen than he had most years of his life. That fucking asshole Simon Cotter. His humiliation of Gordon would never end.

On the forty-third floor the board was waiting to meet him with all the usual hearty jokes and false civilities. Purvis Alloway came forward with a handshake and — sure sign of betrayal to come — the simultaneous hand on the shoulder.

‘Probably best, Mr Chairman,’ — how they loved the formality of titles — ‘if I chair this meeting, since it’s mostly about...you know...’

‘Sure, sure ...‘ Gordon waved the politeness aside. ‘I was going to suggest the same thing myself.’

‘Shall we be getting on?’

Gordon, breathing heavily felt sweat breaking out over his face as he sat at the opposite end from Alloway. He opened his briefcase and scooped out piles and piles of documents onto the table in front of him. An embarrassed silence fell and he knew that he had overdone the paperwork. Only crazed litigants and public health scare fanatics carry so much documentation about with them, he realised. He could feel pins of sweat beginning to push out from every pore on his face and he was breathing heavily as though he had taken the stairs.

He sat down, flushed while Alloway coughed and proceeded with business.

‘Gentlemen, I call this extraordinary meeting to order. Under article nine we may dispense with minutes and proceed to the single item on the agenda papers before us. I have promised the press a statement by twelve noon, which I think gives us time to cover all our, ah, bases. Before we listen to Mr Fendeman would anybody care to make any opening comments?’

Everyone was gentle and tactful and kind. No one wished to cast the least doubt on Gordon’s integrity. Several board members had wry and vinegary remarks to make on the subject of the British press and its irresponsibility.

Suzie, Gordon’s secretary, sat on Alloway’s left and took notes in shorthand.

‘I don’t believe, Mr Acting Chairman,’ said one board member, ‘that the London Evening Press even possesses an Africa correspondent.’

‘That’s right!’ Gordon put in eagerly. ‘I have a friend who works for the BBC World Service in Nairobi, and he deposes that at no time has a single British print journalist ...’ He broke off, realising that it was not his turn to speak. ‘Well, I guess we’ll come to that later.’

Others wished to remind the board that it was Gordon Fendeman’s vision, Gordon Fendeman’s sense of justice, Gordon Fendeman’s idealism and sheer guts that had created this business in the first place. He had built it up from nothing, to a respectable shipper in speciality coffees and thence into a major quoted stock market player. A famous brand. The question of his share dealings in —ironically — the London Evening Press, was not a question for this board. If Gordon needed time to deal with his detractors, perhaps he could step down temporarily? The board member wished to emphasise the word ‘temporarily’, place it on the record and urge strongly for its inclusion in the press statement. When Gordon had cleared his name — and the board member for one never doubted that he would — then the way would be clear for him to be welcomed back to the chairman’s office. How was that for a plan?

The ‘hear hears’ and pattings of the blotters came so fast and so unanimously that Gordon realised at once that this compromise had been prearranged behind his back.

‘Before we come to a vote on that...’ said Purvis Alloway. Gordon swallowed and drew in a breath ready to begin his great speech, ‘I have a special request to put to the board. It is a little unorthodox perhaps, but since this is an extraordinary meeting called under extraordinary circumstances, I take it there will be no objection.’

Everyone looked at Purvis and this time Gordon knew that the surprise was not being sprung on him alone.

‘I received this morning a letter from a lady staying at Hazlitt’s Hotel,’ Alloway continued. ‘Her name is Princess M’binda and she claims to have information vital to the good name of this company. She is waiting in my office now. I think we should hear her.’

Gordon’s mouth was very dry and he took a sip of water, knowing that every face was turned in his direction. Setting down the glass he looked up, feigned surprise at the sight of so many eyes upon him.

‘Of course,’ he said, ‘why not? Show her in by all means.

Alloway pressed the chairman’s buzzer under the table and the door to the boardroom opened.

Everyone around the table rose awkwardly to their feet, Gordon last and most clumsily of all.

‘Good morning, Your ... ah ... good morning, Princess,’ Alloway was a little unsure of protocol and like the others had been thrown off guard by the extreme beauty of the girl who had come in and was now backed shyly against the wall. She was six foot tall and wrapped in vivid green, red and yellow cotton. The board members became suddenly and uncomfortably aware of the photographs on the wall which displayed similar girls in similar dress, girls with berry-filled baskets on their heads smiling toothily at the camera.

Alloway went to the side of the room to pull forward a chair which he placed to the right of his own and a little further back from the table. ‘Please, madam, if you would be so good as to sit down.’

She stayed where she was, arms outstretched and palms flattened against the wall, her large eyes fixed on the window. Alloway understood at once.

‘Is it the height, my dear? Would you like us to draw the curtains?’

The girl nodded and one board member attended to the blinds, while another switched on the lights. Immediately, the tension went out of her body and she dropped onto the chair with great elegance. Her eyes met Gordon’s at the end of the table opposite and held them steadily.

Gordon’s breath had been growing very shallow since the moment her name had been mentioned and his mouth was dry and clacky, but he knew that to take another drink of water would be to lose a psychological battle. He met the girl’s gaze and she slowly dropped her eyes to her lap.

‘Now then,’ Alloway was looking at a letter on the table in front of him. ‘You say that you have information vital to the interests of this company. Perhaps you would be good enough to tell us who you are and what information it is that you have for us?’

‘I am the Princess M’binda of the Ankoza,’ she began. ‘We are a people of the hills. My father B’goli was their king...’

As she talked, and Suzie’s pencil raced along her pad, Gordon was transported in his mind back to East Africa. He had been forced to go there because a shipment of futures on which he had invested the last of his — of Hillary’s — money had been delayed, as he thought, in port. In fact, the beans were in store somewhere, close to rotting. It had been his fault. Some piece of paperwork, eight months before, had not been sent from London. Typical of his luck.

It had been sorted out at last, at great extra cost, and he had met a man in a bar who had told him about the Ankoza. ‘They grew the plantation themselves from scratch, it’s just coming into maturity now. Some Robusta but Arabica mostly. Top quality peaberries too. Good high air, but they don’t know shit about selling coffee. They take it to market would you believe? Waste of damn good growing country. I’m trying to get my people to take an interest.’

Well, Gordon had found them first and charmed B’goli, their chief, into agreeing to accept him as their exclusive buyer for the produce of their soft lilac-coloured mountains. He had hurried back to civilisation to sell his original consignment, at a thundering loss, and used the cash to set up his own brokerage and to hire lawyers to hammer B’goli’s agreement into an ironclad contract. He duly obtained B’goli’s signature and word got about that there was a new player in town. A fortnight after he had registered his brokerage a man from the government came to see Gordon.

‘Dear me. It cannot be that you are going into business with the Ankoza? But everybody knows how corrupt they are. They will cheat you and rob you. My people, on the other hand, the Kobali people, thoroughly reliable. How much easier to deal with them. The government is entirely Kobali. How much more quickly your coffee will go through port, how much more efficiently it will be handled if you deal only with Kobali! Trading with the Ankoza, it is doubtful that a single bean would reach the warehouses. No, no, my friend. Much better deal with us. What’s this? The contract is not with the Ankoza ... it is with the land. My dear fellow, this makes it so simple! The Ankoza do not own this land. No, no, no. I assure you they do not. I tell you what we shall do. We shall compensate you for all this extra work — a hundred thousand pounds English sterling — and we shall help you to remove those scoundrel Ankoza from the land they are illegally occupying.’

Not his fault. Not his fault. It was the man in the bar. Someone would have got there if Gordon hadn’t, it was inevitable. The Ankoza were always going to be kicked out. Not his fault. But M’binda...

The moment he had seen her, he had wanted her. He had asked that she be kept behind. She had wept inconsolably as her father and his family had been loaded onto lorries like potatoes and driven down the hill.

It was not rape though. If she said that it was rape, she was lying. She had been... if not compliant, certainly not non-compliant. She had been nothing. A lifeless doll.

Her word against his, that was the point. His word against hers. For the time being it was important to look surprised, outraged at everything she said, as if each fresh accusation came as a shock. He was somehow upset by the presence of Suzie in the room. She had never once looked up, but her pencil had never stopped moving and her lips moved imperceptibly as she scribbled. The whole story was down there in Pitman hieroglyphs and later today she would type it up into minutes. Gordon wanted to wrench the pad from her and rip it to pieces.

Nobody was looking at him now as M’binda finished her tale. That wasn’t true. She was looking at him. No disgust in her eyes, no flash of vengeful hatred. She just looked with a cool and steady gaze that screwed his lungs into a ball.

‘When I was allowed to leave I found my family living in iron sheds in a dusty village below the mountains. When the rains came the water from the mountains filled the village and the dust became mud. My mother and two of my brothers died from malaria. My father and my sisters, they died from cholera. That is my story. My father the king, he trusted Mr Fendeman very much and now he is dead and my people are starving, diseased and their hearts are broken from loss of home.’

Alloway leaned forward and patted her on the hand. ‘Thank you, Your Highness. Thank you very much indeed.’

Gordon coughed involuntarily and tried to turn the cough into a laugh.

‘Preposterous,’ he spluttered, dabbing at his face with a handkerchief. ‘I mean, gentlemen, please!’ He looked them all in the eyes, each one in turn. ‘I think ... I insist that it is time I had my say. Firstly, I have to tell you that I have never seen this woman before in my life.’ He used the word ‘woman’ because he was uncomfortably aware how young she looked. He knew that everyone around the table would have made their calculations and determined that five years ago, at the time Gordon was in Africa, she can have been no older than thirteen or fourteen. ‘Secondly, what she says about the contract with King B’goli is a clever concoction of half truths. Yes, the deal was with the land, not with the people. But that is standard. You all know that. She paints a charming picture of naïve simplicity and honest dignity, but poverty?

Excuse me. This lady has flown from Africa and is staying — where did you say, Purvis? — the Waldorf. The Waldorf Fucking Hotel, you should excuse my French. We should all be so poor, Princess. Most importantly of all. Where is the proof? Am I to be condemned on the say so of a plausible actress, playing on your guilty heart strings. Christ almighty, I’m a married man. I have a family. Where is the proof? Without proof none of this is anything more than slander.’

‘Perhaps I can help you there, gentlemen.’

Every head turned towards the doorway, the source of the interruption. Simon Cotter strode in, smiling and stood behind M’binda, a hand resting on the back of her chair.

Gordon blinked the sweat out of his eyes and tried to speak, but no words came.

Purvis Alloway had sprung to his feet ‘I don’t know who let you in — Mr Cotter is it not? — but this is a private board meeting and I must ask you to remove yourself. If you have any submissions to make, I suggest you make them formally, in writing, to the chairman.’

‘I’m not in the habit, Mr Alloway,’ said Simon smoothly, ‘of writing to myself, formally or otherwise.’

‘Excuse me?’

‘As of ten o’clock this morning I became the majority shareholder in this company. I think that gives me every right to be here.’

A murmur of conversation broke out and one board member’s hand inched towards his mobile phone. Alloway slapped the table.

‘Gentlemen, please!’ He turned back to Cotter.

‘Is this really true?’

Simon passed a piece of paper. ‘A record of the transaction from my broker. You may check with your own people, if you prefer.’

‘No, no. This seems in order ... really, Mr Cotter, we had no idea of your intentions towards our company. You come at a difficult moment.’

‘I could not help but overhear Mr Fendeman defending himself. He has a carrying voice, if I may say so.

Gordon’s face was grey and he was finding it difficult to control his breathing. He could feel the sweat around his collar and the cold drops ran from his armpits down the side of his body to his waist.

‘I said I can help you,’ continued Simon, ‘and I can. Let me deal straightaway with the subject of proof. I have here —‘ he laid three pieces of paper carefully on the table, sworn depositions, duly, as you will see from the seals, notarised. The first confirms Mr Fendeman’s receipt of a hundred thousand pounds from the government. It is signed by the man who offered the bribe. The second contains the signature of another government official who testifies that Mr Fendeman insisted as part of the deal that the thirteen-year-old Princess M’binda be kept behind during the eviction of the Ankoza people. The third affidavit is signed by two drivers and a soldier, each of whom saw Mr Fendeman personally carry the Princess into a hut. The soldier, I’m afraid, who was young at the time, actually looked through a hole in the wall of the hut and witnessed the entire rape. At a moment’s notice any or all of these people can be flown to the United Kingdom if Mr Fendeman wishes to contest their evidence.’

Despite the hammering in his chest and the buzzing in his ears, Gordon managed to speak. The sound was hoarse and barely above the level of a whisper but everybody in the room heard it and Suzie’s pencil faithfully recorded the word.

‘Why?’

Simon smiled. ‘Why? Simple justice, Mr Fendeman. Simple justice.’

The sweat was running into his eyes but, with a jolt that wrenched at his lungs the realisation came upon him. He had only met him once, twenty years ago, but the image had never left him. It was an image that summed up everything Gordon hated about England and everything he hated about himself.

‘It’s you!’ he croaked.

He had only one thought now. The window. The blinds were down, but if he ran fast enough and led with his shoulder he could do it. He could break free and do one last thing that Albie might admire.

He charged like a mad bull. He heard cries of ‘Stop him!’ from the table and out of the corner of his eye he saw Suzie’s startled face look up from her pad at last.

He hit the window hard and, contemptible, useless prick that he was, failure from first to last, he bounced back like a squash-ball. As he crashed to the ground he felt his throat tighten in an iron stranglehold and a lightning-bolt of pain flashed and thumped down his left side. This was how he had watched his father die twenty years ago. The same roar of pain and clutching at the throat. Suzie, God bless her, was the first by his side, loosening his tie and raising his head. The others clustered behind her and at the back he saw the face looking down at him.

‘Ned fucking Maddstone,’ he said as he died. ‘Fuck you for ever.

Simon was out of the room before the last breath had left Gordon’s body. Time was fleeting by and he was on a tight schedule. Hairdressers to see and miles to go before he slept.

‘Two!’ he whispered, tactfully closing the door behind him.

Oliver Delft had been sent to find a hacker in Knightsbridge. Not to arrest him, but to recruit him.

‘Cosima picked up his trail and we’ve been watching him from a distance ever since. A good poacher who’ll make an even better gamekeeper,’ Cotter had told him. ‘Very young, but quite brilliant.’

Oliver was having trouble finding the right address. There was 46, an ice-cream parlour and there was 47, a College of English. Of 46B there was no sign whatsoever. He stood at the door of the College and pondered the problem. It was undignified to be back in the world of legwork. He had taken the Cotter shilling gladly, but he should have known that there would be a price. In his world, Oliver had been supreme commander. The pay was atrocious and the bureaucratic constrictions suffocating. Was he now nothing more than a bird in a gilded cage?

As he stood examining the doorbells a hand fell on his shoulder from behind. Oliver dropped the shoulder and tried to turn, but the hand knew what it was doing and had anticipated his move. It gripped the shoulder harder.

‘You come along with us, sir. Micky, car door. I shall read the gentleman his rights.’

If this was the private sector Oliver wanted nothing to do with it. The two bent-nosed plug-uglies either side of him were not officers of the law, for all their uniforms, plastic cuff-links and portentous language. Oliver had known a few in his time and he would have been prepared to bet that all this pair knew about police stations was the colour of tiles inside the cells. He sensed the strength and the violence in them, however, and was not prepared to argue just yet. If they were working for this hacker, then CDC had been seriously compromised. That kraut woman, his predecessor, was clearly incompetent, everyone at Cotter’s had told him so. She had stumbled on something she did not understand. However. Delft trusted his wits and at the end of it all smelled the possibility of gain. When Delft follows you into a revolving door, he likes to say, he always comes out first....

They drove north in silence. The driver interested Oliver. He saw the eyes watching him from the mirror. Sixty-ish, more dignified than the yahoos in the back. He could be a copper easily. Something familiar about him? Probably not.

The car swept into a farmhouse driveway and again a little stab of déjà vu visited the pit of his stomach. A childhood holiday? Mysteriouser and mysteriouser.

Oliver was led into a bare kitchen and told to sit down.

‘Don’t move.’

‘It isn’t easy to sit down without moving.’

Ah, big mistake. An enormous fist crunched into the back of his neck. Oliver sat down. Sudden blows to the back of the neck, as to the nose, can cause the tear ducts to spring. Oliver blinked rapidly and widened his eyes to let them flow without reddening. He really was not going to be seen crying. That would be too ridiculous. He looked up at the ceiling, dilating his nostrils and sniffing, like a man who looks into the sun to make himself sneeze, while they removed his shoes and his tie. Did they imagine that he, Oliver Delft was the type to hang himself. Just when things were getting so interesting? The two barbarians left and he heard them lock the door behind them.

The tears subsided and he looked around. An Aga and a fridge. Was it a holiday? A dirty weekend years ago? He was sure now that he had been here before. It was an old-fashioned fridge, a squat Prestcold. Yet he could see lighter paint against the wall that suggested it had been put in to replace a taller, slimmer one. All very odd.

There was an LEP on the table. Today’s early edition.

ABUSE IN SWEDISH HOSPITAL OF HELL

It wasn’t the headline, it was the photograph inset halfway down that grabbed Oliver’s attention.

Mallo!

Thank Christ he was out of the service. God bless Simon Cotter. Looked like there was going to be a stink.

Would Mallo talk? If he was being threatened with arrest he might. Idiot prick, the whole point of Mallo was that he followed the regulations. Diplomas on the wall, government inspections, everything nice and legal. What the hell had he done to bring down the wrath of the Swedish government?

Who was there left in the padded cells who might lead a nosy investigation back to the department? Well, there was that mad idealist from Porton Down of course, research chemist — what was his name? — Michaels, Francis Michaels. There was Babe Fraser if he was still alive, which was doubtful. The only time Oliver had seen him, as a junior on the trail of all the money that the son of a bitch had salted away, the great legend had been as potty as a prawn, brains fried to hell. That was when Oliver had found about ‘The Island of Dr Mallo’. No, there was no danger from Babe. Finally of course there was young Ned Maddstone. Oliver remembered him as a mental weakling. He’d have been ECT-ed into gaga-land years since.

The article didn’t say much. Just that the conditions had been ‘medieval’ and that there had been allegations of physical and sexual abuse. Hardly worthy of the front page. If it had all taken place in Britain, Oliver could understand such a report appearing in an English paper, but why bother Londoners with such routine dross? Sexual abuse, he decided. The phrase sold millions of papers up and down the land. The law-abiding liked to read about it at their breakfast tables and on their trains. They tut-tutted in horror while deep inside their deepest, darkest fantasies were touched.

‘Sorry to keep you waiting. I hope you haven’t been uncomfortable. You’ve been crying I see, do borrow my handkerchief.’

‘Simon?’ Oliver stared. Cotter was removing his sunglasses. He had dyed his hair blond. No, he had undyed his hair. The blond was streaked with grey.

‘Simon?’ said Ned. ‘I know no Simon. Look again.’

Oliver looked again and saw that he was looking into the blue eyes of Ned Maddstone.

‘Not exactly the same fridge,’ he observed at length.

‘No,’ Ned admitted ruefully. ‘But as close as I could get. Thought it might help you feel at home.’

‘Oh it does, it does.’ Oliver was holding himself together very well. ‘You’ve been busy,’ he remarked.

Ned looked around the kitchen. ‘Thank you. I always say good design is all about taking away, not adding. You’ll note that aside from the fridge there is no other furniture or fitments, for reasons you will discover later. The old place hadn’t changed that much, as a matter of fact. Oh, there’s the Aga of course. Same old one. Tch! Agas, eh? Where would we be without them?’

‘No, no. I meant Ashley Barson-Garland and now poor old Gordon Fendeman. I should have made the connection.’

‘People keep saying that to me. You mustn’t blame yourself, it was a long time ago. But we mustn’t say “poor old Gordon Fendeman”, you know. He’s happy now. Gone to a better place.’

‘Quite the avenging angel, aren’t you?’

‘I do my best, Oliver, I do my best. As you will discover.’

‘You escaped then, from the “Swedish Hospital of Hell”?’ Oliver jerked his head towards the newspaper.

‘Ah, I thought that might amuse you. All nonsense as a matter of fact, had the paper specially made up for your entertainment. You’ll be pleased to know that dear Dr Mallo is still there. He’s working for me now. I have some documents in my possession that he would prefer kept private between ourselves. He’s a very reasonable man, as you know. He likes to describe himself as a rationalist. Pompous, but rather touching.’

‘Am I to be lectured at? If that’s your punishment, I might as well tell you here and now that I’m very good at switching off.’

‘My dear old periwinkle, was I lecturing? How very graceless of me. Let me fetch you a glass of milk. No? I’m having one myself. Sure? Okay then. Fresh and creamy this time. Not UHT semi-skimmed. There are limits to authenticity, after all.’

Oliver was thinking rapidly. The plastic bracelets around his wrist were more than he could cope with on his own. The man behind the wheel he had now identified as Sergeant Floyd, the Drug Squad officer he had bribed to keep his mouth shut over Ned’s arrest. He still had no idea who the other two men might be, but he had a nasty idea.

‘Smart of you to escape. I have to confess I didn’t mark you down as that sort.'

Ned sat down at the table opposite Oliver. ‘You met Babe, I think. You were one of the squad that tried to beat it out of him when you found out that all that money was missing.

‘So Mr Memory himself put the jigsaw together for you did he? Thought it was rather beyond your limited capabilities.’

‘His capabilities are now mine.

‘Oh I don’t think so, old crocus. Babe was special.’

‘Well,’ said Ned, not allowing himself to be annoyed. ‘We can agree on that at least. He even remembered your mother, you know? One glance at a file is all he ever had. Date of birth, everything.’

‘Must have been fun for him to have a blank canvas on which to paint,’ said Oliver. ‘Dumb brick of a child, eager to learn. Taught you all those languages. Smattering of philosophy and mathematics. Arranged your escape too, I’ll bet. You couldn’t have managed that on your own. Too weak to make it over the wall himself. Am I to expect him to walk through the door at any minute? “Aha, you pampered Asiatic Jades, I’ve a thirst on me today.” All that? My old boss used to do quite an impression of him.’

‘Babe is dead. Yes, he did arrange the escape. Yes, he did teach me. Yes, I was a dumb brick. You can’t expect me to rise to such obvious bait.’

‘Above that, are you? All passion spent. What are you now? Nemesis? The Hammer of God? The Cold Hand of Fate?’

‘Something like that,’ said Ned. ‘You will have plenty of time to decide what I am. You will be able to ponder too on what you are. Years you will have. There’ll be Martin and Paul and Rolf and dear Dr Mallo to help you come to a decision. The best possible care. No one else, I’m afraid. A small staff, but since there will be only one patient, I’m sure you won’t feel badly served.’

‘For fuck’s sake

‘The journey will be painful. But no more painful than was mine. My driver John, his two friends the Draper brothers and ex-Superintendent Floyd will take you over the water. My driver John — you’ll remember him as Mr Gaine, he’s put on a bit of weight, but you’ll find he’s lost none of his charm — will dislocate your shoulder which will cause quite shattering pain. It will unbalance your walk, which we can’t have, so Rolf will dislocate the other One for you.

‘You’re insane.

‘If I’m insane then so are you. Nothing will happen to you that did not happen to me. You are a grown man. I was a frightened child.’

‘My family! I have a family. You’ve sat with my children.’

‘I had a family, Oliver. The Fendemans had a family. When you had me recite the name of Peter Fendeman into a tape-recorder, did you consider Portia’s family?’

‘But her father is fine! He was released after a week. Special Forces had been a little rough when they arrested him, but he was soon released. He’s alive, isn’t he? He’s happy? And think...’ Oliver was clutching at straws now. ‘Why did he name his daughter Portia? Remember Portia in The Merchant of Venice? “The quality of mercy is not strained, it droppeth like the gentle rain from heaven upon the place beneath. It is twice blessed. It blesses him that gives and him that receives."'

‘How perfectly marvellous that you should mention Shakespeare’s Portia. A happy coincidence, I was about to come to the one option left open to you if you really do wish to avoid a lifetime as a guest of Dr Mallo.’

‘Yes? What? What is it?’

‘There are, in case you have forgotten, two Portias in Shakespeare. One, as you rightly pointed out just now, in

The Merchant of Venice. But have you forgotten the other

Portia. The Portia in Julius Caesar?’

Oliver’s head was dizzy. ‘I don’t understand.’

‘She chooses to take her own life, if you recall, by swallowing hot coals. Always used to fascinate me as a child. How could it be done? Well, the Aga there is old-fashioned. The solid fuel type. There’s no other means of self slaughter in the room, I’m afraid. I’ve checked thoroughly and I know something about how rooms are furnished to prevent suicide. The floor and walls are rubberised, nothing metal, stone or wooden here. You could bash your head against the Aga I suppose, but I doubt it would kill you and it would certainly annul our agreement. It’s up to you. The plastic of your cuffs will melt against the stove very nicely. Agony, I should imagine, but it will work. You simply lift up the lid and help yourself. Basically, Oliver, it’s up to you. Swallow fiery coals like Portia or face the rest of your life in an insane asylum. You have ten minutes to make up your mind.’

‘You are mad.’

‘So you keep saying. I don’t understand how repeating it makes any difference. If it’s untrue then you can hardly expect me to be swayed by insult. If it’s true then I should have thought that it is even more useless to appeal to me. God have mercy on your soul either way, about sums it up. Nine minutes and forty-five seconds.’

The others were in the sitting-room, clustered around Mr Gaine, who was having difficulty with a crossword. Ned helped them finish it.

‘That should be owl. “Tight as an —“ Owl. You’ve put “eft”, John.’

‘Oh, well. Yeah. I reckoned, you know. An eft is a type of newt. Pissed as a newt, pissed as an eft.’

‘Mm,’ marvelling at Gaine’s thought processes, Ned checked that everything was ready.

‘Van warmed up? Good. The boat is ready. Everyone knows what they have to do.’

‘Everything ready, sir,’ said Floyd, smartly. ‘When We arrive at Levington it should be dark enough to —The screams were like nothing anyone in the room had ever heard before. Mr Gaine and the Drapers had seen violence. Floyd had witnessed enough to last a lifetime, but this ... this was something new. He started towards the kitchen, but Ned held his hand up to detain him.

‘Give him a moment,’ he said. ‘This is his choice.’

The Drapers looked at each other with wide eyes. Gaine looked down at the carpet and Floyd stared at Ned. The screaming stopped.

‘Now I think,’ said Ned, who was the first to reach the kitchen door.

Delft’s hair and clothes were on fire, blisters the size of oranges had ballooned from his lips and his mouth was screaming. He had no tongue and no vocal chords with which to make a sound. He was hurling himself against the wall, clawing at his body.

He caught sight of Ned and lurched towards him. Ned smartly closed the door and bolted it. They heard the body bang against the rubber surface of the door.

‘We’ll give him another five minutes,’ he said. ‘He’ll be done then.’

Floyd put a hand on Ned’s chest. ‘I’m sorry, Mr Cotter,’ he said. ‘I don’t care how much you’re paying me. Someone’s got to go in there and put him out of his misery.’

Ned slipped aside and led the way back into the sitting room. ‘A word,’ he said. He stood and faced them with his back to the fireplace. ‘Now, let’s just sort ourselves out shall we? Mr Floyd, you arranged the lease of this house?’

‘You know I did, but what —?‘

‘You paid in cash. The same with the car and the van?’

‘Of course.’

‘No one knows you’ve been here. Once we’ve wiped all the prints, the place will be clean.’

‘That’s not the point, sir.

‘Oh but it is, Mr Floyd.’ Ned took a small revolver from his pocket and shot Floyd through the throat. Moving round anticlockwise, he shot Gaine and the Drapers in the head. He dipped the end of the revolver in Gaine’s cup of tea on the table by the sofa and it hissed pleasingly. Ned drank the tea and dropped down to Gaine’s body. He pulled a set of car keys from the jacket, put them in his own pocket and moved to the kitchen.

Delft was lying on the floor writhing and twitching.

‘One,’ whispered Ned, administering a final kick to the charred ruin beneath him.

He drove the car as far as Peterborough, where he left it in the station car park, right next to the Lexus that he and Gaine had left there eight hours earlier. A busy day and still not over yet.

Ned was surprised that he was trembling, for he knew that he was calm. He had that true calm that can only come to those who have earned their night’s repose. The peace that flows from true achievement.

Now he was ready to turn his mind to good things. The memory of Babe would be celebrated in every major city from Copenhagen to Canberra. Libraries, schools, hospitals. An international university. Research centres. Orphanages run on new, enlightened principles. The children of the world would be enriched in mind and body. Portia would be by his side. Together they would rule the greatest charitable empire on earth. All the good that would flow from them. Maybe, in some extraordinary way, everything that had happened to him had been part of a great plan. How dull his life would have been without this great cause that had lit him from within for so many years. The stars had guided him well. They had led him to this great point.

He looked across the street to the house. Through the darkness he saw that the lights were on in one room only. Portia and Albert would be sitting in the kitchen, perhaps, .talking quietly.

He rang the doorbell, but there was no reply. He rang again. A cat leapt down from the wall and rubbed itself against his ankles, mewing plaintively. Ned heard another plaintive sound from within, a low whining chant that he could not understand. He pushed against the door which swung open on its hinges. The cat jumped in ahead of him.

‘Portia? Are you there? Portia, it’s Ned.’

The chanting grew louder. Ned saw a light shining through the kitchen hatch and walked round into the dining-room.

‘Portia, it’s me. What are you doing here?’

A black cloth had been hung over the mirror above the sideboard and on a low stool sat Peter, his jacket and tie ripped. His eyes were cast down to the floor and he was chanting a Hebrew prayer.





THE STARS’




‘Peter? It’s me. You remember me?’

Peter lifted his eyes. ‘Ned. I remember you. It’s Ned.’

‘Where are Portia and Albert?’

‘Gone. They are gone. My brother’s son is dead, did you know?’

‘Where? Where have they gone?’

‘Who knows?’

Ned left the room and ran upstairs. Clothes trailed across the floor, wardrobes hung open, bottles of shampoo and tubes of toothpaste had fallen into the basin under the bathroom cabinet and the floor was littered with pill-bottles and combs and bars of soap. They had left in a hurry, in a terrible panic. Did they think they had something to fear from him? From Ned?

He rushed downstairs again. The old man’s moaning was driving him crazy.

‘Where did they go? They must have told you.’

Peter said nothing but continued to rock backwards and forwards, singing his prayers. Ned went into the kitchen to find some milk. The light of the fridge shone onto the table and that is where he saw the envelope.

Ned Maddstone

He remembered her handwriting! From all those years he remembered her handwriting. He held the envelope to his cheek.

‘Now go,’ Peter’s voice came through the hatchway. ‘Go and never come back. You’ve done enough. Go.’

He sat in the car and wept. Nothing for him. Just the old letters. Not even a note. She couldn’t hide from him. His power would uncover her wherever she was in the world.

What then? Suppose he found her. What would he do then? Keep her prisoner? Force her to marry him? It was too late. It had always been too late.

Ned knew exactly what he had to do. He had to go home. It was so simple. So obvious. He must go home, away from the noise and terror of the world. Home, where it was either light and bright, or cosy and dark. Home, where they understood him. Home, where there was peace and ease and gentleness and love. Home, in every language that he spoke, it was the best and strongest word. Home. His Swedish island. Where his friends lived and where the ghost of Babe would come to him and teach him more.

He stood on the deck looking back towards England. He let the pieces of paper fly from his hand and dart like butterflies in the wake. They came from the last century, an age when lovers wrote letters to each other sealed up in envelopes. Sometimes they used coloured inks to show their love, or they perfumed their writing-paper with scent.

He slowly ripped the last of them, just glimpsing down at a halved sheet.

I picture your hair flopping down as you write, which is enough to make me writhe and froth like a... like a ... er, I’ll come back to you on that one. I think of your legs under the table and a million trillion cells sparkle and fizz inside me. The way you cross a ‘t’ makes me breathless. I hold the back of my envelope to my lips and think of you licking it and my head swims. I’m a dotty dippy dozy dreadful delirious romantic and I love you to heaven.

Ned let the wind whip it from his hand.




Unknown





Unknown




Making Coffee It starts with a dream … It starts with a dream. This story, which can start everywhere and nowhere like a circle, starts, for me - and it is after all, my story and no one else’s, never could be anyone else’s but mine - it starts with a dream I dreamed one night in May. The wildest kind of dream. Jane was in it, stiff and starchy as a hotel napkin. He was there too. I didn’t recognise him of course. I hardly knew him then. Just an old man to nod to in the street or smile through a politely held library door. The dream rejuvenated him, transformed him from boneless, liver-spotted old beardy into Mack Sennet barman with drooping black moustache, tacked to a face hang-dog long and white with undernourishment. His face, for all that. Not that I knew it then. In this dream he was in the lab with Jane: Jane’s lab, of course - the dream was not prophetic enough to foretell the dimensions of his lab, which I only got to know later - that is if the dream was prophetic at all, which it may well not have been. If you get me. This is going to be hard. Anyway, she was peering into a microscope and he was feeling her up from behind. He stroked between her thighs inside the long white coat. She was taking no notice, but I was outraged, outraged when the soft veef of hands rubbing nylon stopped and I knew that his fingers had reached the uppermost part of her long legs, the place where stocking ended and soft hot private flesh - hot private flesh belonging to me - began. ‘Leave her alone!’ I called from some unseen director’s corner, behind, as it were, the dream’s camera. He gazed up at me with sad eyes that held me, as they always do, in the bright beam of their blue. Or always subsequently did, because I had, in my real waking life at that point, never so much as exchanged a single word with him.

1

‘Wachet auf,’ he says. And I obey. Strong light of a May morning whitening the dirty cream of cruddy curtains that we meant to change months ago. ‘Morning, babe,’ I murmur. ‘Double Gloucester … my mother always said cheese dreams.’ But she’s not there. Jane that is, not my mother. My mother isn’t there either as a matter of fact. Certainly not. It absolutely isn’t that kind of story. Jane’s half of the bed is cold. I strain my ears for the hissing of the shower or the crack of teacups banged clumsily on the draining-board. Everything Jane does, outside of work, she does clumsily. She has this habit of turning her head away from her hands, like a squeamish student nurse picking up a raw appendix. The hand holding a cigarette end, for instance, might stretch leftwards to an ashtray, while she will look off to the right, grinding the butt into a saucer, a book, a tablecloth, a plate of food. I have always found uncoordinated women, near-sighted women, long, gawky, awkward women, powerfully attractive. I have started to wake up now. The last granules of the dream fizz away and I am ready for the morning puzzle of self-reinvention. I stare at the ceiling and remember what there is to remember. We will leave me lying there for the moment, reassembling myself. I am not entirely sure that I am telling this story the right way round. I have said that it is like a circle, approachable from any point. It is also, like a circle, {inapproachable from any point. History is my business. What a way to start … history isn’t my business at all. I managed, at least, to stop myself from describing history as my ‘trade’, for which I reckon I can award myself some points. History is my passion, my calling. Or, to be more painfully truthful, it is my field of least incompetence. It is what, for the time being, I do. Had I the patience and the discipline I should have chosen literature. But, while

2

can read Middle-march and The Dunciad or, I don’t know, Julian Barnes or Jay Mclnerney say, as happily as anyone, I have this little region missing in my brain, that extra lobe that literature students possess as a matter of course, the lobe that allows them the detachment and the nerve to talk about books (texts they will say) as others might talk about the composition of a treaty or the structure of a cell. I can remember at school how we would read together in class an Ode by Keats, a Shakespeare sonnet or a chapter of Animal Farm. I would tingle inside and want to sob, just at the words, at nothing more than the simple progression of sounds. But when it came to writing that thing called an Essay, I flubbed and floundered. I could never discover where to start. How do you find the distance and the cool to write in an academically approved style about something that makes you spin, wobble and weep? I remember that child in the Dickens novel, Hard Times I think it is, the girl who had grown up with carnival people, spending her days with horses, tending them, feeding them, training them and loving them. There’s a scene where Gradgrind (it is Hard Times, I’ve just looked it up) is showing off his school to a visitor and asks this girl to define ‘horse’ and of course the poor scrap dries up completely, just stutters and fumbles and stares hopelessly in front of her like a mong. ‘Girl number twenty unable to define a horse!’ Gradgrind says and turns with a great sneer to the smart little weasel, Bitzer, a cocksure street kid who’s probably never dared so much as pat a horse in his life, gets a kick out of throwing stones at them I expect. This little runt stands up with a smirk and comes out pat with ‘Quadruped. Graminivorous. Forty teeth …’ and so on, to wild applause and admiration. ‘Now girl number twenty you know what a horse is,’ says Gradgrind. Well, each time I was asked to write an essay at school, with a title like ‘Wordsworth’s Prelude is the Egotism

3

without the Sublime: Discuss’ I felt, when I got back my paper marked E or F or whatever, as if I were the stuttering horse-lover and the rest of the class, with their As and Bs were the smart-arsed parroting runts who had lost their souls. You could only write successfully about books and poems and plays if you didn’t care, really care, about them. Hysterical schoolboy wank, for sure, an attitude compounded of nothing but egotism, vanity and cowardice. But how deeply felt. I went through all my schooldays convinced of this, that ‘literary studies’ were no more than a series of autopsies performed by heartless technicians. Worse than autopsies: biopsies. Vivisection. Even movies, which I love more than anything, more than life itself, they even do it with movies these days. You can’t talk about movies now without a methodology. Once they start offering courses, you know the field is dead. History, I found, was safer ground for me: I didn’t love Rasputin or Talleyrand or Charles the Fifth or Kaiser Bill. Who could? A historian has the pleasant luxury of being able to point out, from the safety of his desk, where Napoleon ballsed up, how this revolution might have been avoided, that dictator toppled or those battles won. I found I could be most marvellous dispassionate with history, where everyone, by definition, is truly dead. Up to a point. Which brings us round to the telling of this tale. As a historian I should be able to offer a good plain account of the events that took place on the … well, when did they take place? It is all highly debatable. When you become more familiar with the story you will understand the huge problems that confront me. A historian, someone said - Burke, I think, if not Burke then Carlysle - is a prophet looking backwards. I cannot approach my story in that fashion. The puzzle that besets me is best expressed by the following statements.

A: None of what follows ever happened B: All of what follows is entirely true 4

Get your head round that one. It means that it is my job to tell you the true story of what never happened. Perhaps that’s a definition of fiction. I admit that this preamble must look rather tricksy: I get as snortingly impatient as the next man when authors draw attention to their writerly techniques, and this sentence itself disappears even more deeply than most into the filthy elastic of its own narrative rectum, but there’s nothing I can do about that. I saw a play the other week (plays are nothing to films, nothing. Theatre is dead but sometimes I like to go and watch the corpse decompose) in which one of the characters said something like this, she said that the truth about things was like a bowl offish-hooks: you try to examine one little truth and the whole lot comes out in a black and vicious bunch. I can’t allow that to happen here. I have to do some unfastening and untangling, so that if the hooks do all come out in one go, they might at least emerge neatly linked, like a chain of paperclips. I feel then that I can confidently enough begin with this little series of connections: if it weren’t for a rotted clasp, an alphabetical adjacency and the predictably vile, thirst- making hangovers to which Alois was subject, then I would have nothing to tell you. So we may as well start at the point I have already claimed (and disclaimed) to be the beginning. There I lie, wondering like Keats, Was it a vision, or a waking dream? Fled is that music, do I wake or sleep? Wondering too, why the Christ Jane isn’t coiled warmly beside me. The clock tells me why. It’s a quarter to nine. She’s never done this to me before. Never. I rush to the bathroom and rush out again, toothpaste dribbling down the corners of my mouth. ‘Jane!’ I bubble. ‘Jane, what the pants is going on? It’s half- past nine!’

5

In the kitchen I snap on the kettle and frenzy around for coffee, sucking my peppermint fluoride lips in panic. An empty bag of Kenco and boxes and boxes and boxes of teas. Raspberry Rendezvous for God’s sake. Rendezvous Orange Dazzler. Banana and Liquorice Dream. Nighttime Delight. Jesus, what is it with her? Every tea but tea tea. And not a bean or bag of coffee to be had. At the back of the cupboard … triumph, glory. Mwah! A big Aquafresh kiss for you, my darling. ‘Safeway Colombian Coffee, Fine Ground for Filters.’ All right! Back to the bedroom, hopping into cut-off denim. No time for boxers, no time for socks. Bare feet jammed into boat shoes, laces later. Into the kitchen again just as the kettle thumps itself off, bit of a hiss from so little water, but enough for a cup, easily enough for a cup. No! Oh damn it, no! No, no, no, no, no! Bitch. Sow. Cow. Angel. Double-bitch. Sweetness. Slag. Jane! ‘Safeway Colombian Coffee, Fine Ground For Filters: Naturally Decaffeinated.’ ‘Pants!’ Calm, Michael. Calm. Bleib ruhig, mein Sohn. I can keep it together. I’m a graduate. A soon-to-bedoctored graduate. I won’t be beaten by this. Not a little nonsense like this. Ha! Gotcha! Lightbulb-over-the-head, finger-snapping eureka, who’s a clever boy? Yes … Those pills, those pep pills. Pro-Doze? No-Doze? Something like that. Skidding into the bathroom, my brain half-registers something. An important fact. Something amiss. Put it to one side. Time enough later.

6

Where they go? Where they go? Here you are, you little buggers … yes, come to Mama … ‘No-Doze. Stay alert. Ideal for exam revision, late nights, driving etc. Each pill contains 5omg caffeine.’ At the kitchen sideboard, like a London cokehead giggling in a night-club toilet, I crush and grind and chop. The chunks of white pop and wink in the coffee mud as I pour the boiling water on. ‘Safeway Colombian Coffee, Fine Ground For Filters: Unnaturally Recaffeinated.’ Now that’s coffee. A tadlet bitter perhaps, but real coffee, not Strawberry Soother or Nettle ‘n’ Camomile tisane. And you say I have no gumption, Jane hun? Ha! Wait till I tell you about this tonight. I outdid Paul Newman in Harper. All he did was recycle an old filter paper, yeah? A quarter to ten. Teaching at eleven. No panic. I stalk comfortably now, mug in hand into the spare room, quite in charge. Bloody showed her. The Apple is cold. A nannying humming nag no more. Who knows when I may condescend to turn you on again, Maccie Thatcher? And there, on the desk, neatly squared, magnificently, obscenely thick, Das Meisterwerk itself. I keep my distance, just craning forward; we cannot allow even the tiniest drop of recaff to stain the glorious title page. From Brunau to Vienna: The Roots of Power Michael Young, MA MPhil Way-hey! Four years. Four years and two hundred thousand words. There’s that bastard keyboard, so plastically dumb, so comically vacuous. QWERTYUIOPASDFGHJKLZXCVBNMI234567890 Nothing else to choose from. Just those ten numbers and twenty-six letters permuted into two hundred thousand words, a comma here and a semi colon there. Yet for a sixth part of my life, a whole sixth of my life, by big beautiful Buddha, that keyboard clawed at me like cancer.

7

Fiff-ha-hoo! Bit of a stretch and there’s the morning workout. I sigh with pleasure and drift back to the kitchen. The i5omg of caffeine has hit the ground running and breasted the blood-brain barrier with arms upraised. I am now awake. Pumpingly A-wake. Yes, I am now awake. Awake to everything. Awake to What Was Wrong in the bathroom. Awake to a piece of paper leaning up between the heel of last night’s cheese and the empty wine-bottle in the centre of the kitchen table. Awake to the reason that at eight on the tit I was not, as I should have been, awake. Let’s face it, Pup. It’s not working, I’ll call back for the rest of my things later today. We’ll sort out how much I owe you for the car. Congratulations on your thesis. Think about it for a while and you’ll know I’m right. J. Even as I feel myself go through the necessary shock, rage and howls, a part of me registers relief, does instantly register relief, or if not relief an awareness certainly that this elegant little note accesses a smaller and less significant proportion of my emotions than have done the earlier absence of coffee or the possibility that I might have been allowed to oversleep or most especially now, the casual, the arrogant assumption that my car shall go to her. The explosion of fury then, is mostly for form’s sake, a kind of compliment to Jane in fact. The hurling of the wine-bottle - the wine-bottle, the celebratory wine-bottle, the wine-bottle I had so carefully chosen at Oddbins the night before, the Chateauneuf du Pape that I had worked towards for a sixth part of my whole life - is a gesture therefore, a necessary theatrical acknowledgement that the ending of our three years together has earned at least some noise and some spectacle. When she returns for her ‘things’ she will spy the elegant curved streak of rusty sediment along the kitchen wall and her big feet will crunch on the glass and she will

8

derive some satisfaction from believing that I ‘cared’ and that will be that. Jane&Michael have ceased to be and now there is Jane and there is Michael and Michael is, at last, Somebody. Somebody, as Lennon would have it, in his own Write. So. In the study, picking up the Meisterwerk, weighing it in my hands, ready to push it delicately into my briefcase, I suddenly goggle, with Roger Rabbit starting eyes to the accompaniment of a loud klaxon, at a small speck on the title page: it has erupted from nowhere like an old surfie’s melanoma, just in the short time I was in the kitchen hurling wine-bottles. It’s not a spot of coffee, I am sure of that, perhaps just a flaw in the paper that only the strong May sunlight can expose. No time to boot up the computer and reprint, so I snatch a bottle of Liquid Paper, touch the tip of the brush to this naughty little freckle and blow gently. Holding the paper by the edges I go outside and hold it against the sun. It is enough. ‘Twill serve. There by the telegraph pole is the space where the Renault should be. ‘You bitch!’ Oh dear. Bad move. ‘Sorry!’ Little delivery girl veers and races away, thrust over the handlebars remembering every terrible story she ever glimpsed on the front of the newspapers she daily dumps onto the doormats. Telling mummy on you. Oh dear. Better give her time or she’ll think I’m following and that won’t do. I don’t know why we have to have a newspaper delivery in the first place. Jane is a newspaper junkie, that’s the fact of the matter. We even get the Cambridge Evening News delivered. Every afternoon. I mean, please. I turn and wheel out the bicycle from the passageway. The ticking of the wheels pleases me. Hell, I am young. I am free. My teeth are clean. In my noble old school

9

briefcase there nestles a future. Nestles the future. The sun shines. To hell with everything else. Making Breakfast The smell of the rats Alois swung into the saddle, shifted the knapsack over his shoulders and began to pump rhythmically up the hill, the green stripes on his uniform trousers and the golden eagle on his helmet flashing in the sun. Klara, watching him go, wondered why he never stood in the pedals to give himself impetus, as children do. Always with him the same absolutely mechanical, frighteningly regular, purposefully subdued action. She had risen at five to light the stove and scrub the kitchen table before the maid was awake. She always felt the need to purge the table of wine stains and the sticky pools of schnapps and shards of broken glass. As if hoping perhaps that the sight of a clean table might make Alois forget how much he had drunk the night before. Nor did she ever want the children to see the ruins of their father’s little evenings in’. When the maid Anna rose at six she had sniffed, as always, at the sight of the clean table and her wrinkled nose had seemed to say to Klara, behind Alois’s back, as he buffed his boots before the stove, ‘I know you. We’re the same. You were a maid too once. Not even a housemaid. Just a kitchen maid. And inside that’s what you still are and always will be.’ Klara, as ever, had watched her husband polish away, envying the love and detail and pride he invested in his uniform. Lulled by the swinging rhythm of brush on leather she had, as ever, wished herself back at Spital with its fields and milk-pails and silage smell, back with her brothers and sisters and their children, away from the respectability, the stiffness, the brutality of Uncle Alois and uniforms and people whose conversations and conventions she could not understand. Uncle Alois! He had forbidden her ever to call him that again.

10

‘I am not your Uncle, girl. A cousin by marriage at most. You will not call me uncle. Understood?’ But when talking to herself she could not help it. Uncle Alois he had always been, and Uncle Alois he would always remain. The night before he had been no more drunk than usual, no more violent, no more abusive, no more insulting. Always with him the same absolutely mechanical, frighteningly regular, purposefully subdued action. When she was being hurt she never made enough noise to awaken Angela and Little Alois for she could not bear the idea that they knew what their father was doing to her. Klara was not an intelligent woman, but she was sensitive and she understood that her stepchildren would feel not sorrow but only contempt for her if they knew she submitted so spiritlessly to their father’s beatings. She was after all, and what a ridiculous fact it was, closer in age to the children than to Alois. That is why, she supposed, he was so determined to have children by her. He wanted to age her, to turn her from a silly country girl into a Mother. Remove the smell of silage. Get some fat on her, some substance, some respectability. Oh, he loved respectability. But then, he was a bastard. It was the one thing she had over him. She may have been a silly country girl, but at least she knew who her father was. Uncle Alois the Bastard did not. Yet she wanted his children too. How desperately she wanted them. Three years earlier their son Gustav had died after just a week of blue, coughing life. The next year a little girl was stillborn and just a year ago the baby Josef had struggled, plucky as a game-cock, for a month before he too was taken. That was when the beatings began. Uncle Bastard had bought a hippopotamus whip and hung it on the wall with a terrible smile. ‘This is Pnina,’ he said. ‘Pnina die Putsch. Pnina the Whip, our new child.’ Klara stood now by the door and watched the upright uniformed figure reach the top of the hill. Only Alois could make such a ridiculous machine as a bicycle seem

11

dignified. And how he loved it. Every new development in patent tyres and pedals and chains excited him. Yesterday he had read out excitedly to little Alois from a newspaper. In Mannheim an engineer called Benz had built a three-wheeled machine that travelled at fifteen kilometres an hour without human effort, without horses, without steam. ‘Imagine that, my boy! Like a private little train that needs no tracks! One day we shall have such a self-propelled machine and travel together to Linz or Vienna like princes.’ Klara turned back into the house and watched Anna frying eggs for the children. ‘Let me do that,’ she wanted to say. She knew how to stop herself now, so she moved instead with quick guilt towards the empty pail by the back door, feeling rather than seeing Anna turn at the squeak of the bucket handle. ‘Let me …’ Anna began, but Klara was outside and the kitchen door shut before the whining sentence could be finished. Klara realised with amusement that she had, as so often, timed her visit to the pump to coincide with the passing of the Innsbruck train. She imagined its earlier progress through meadows and farms and watched, in her mind’s eye, her nephews and nieces in Spital jumping up and down and waving to the driver. She pushed down the handle more quickly and forced the water to plunge into the bucket in just the rhythm of the mighty locomotive as it pushed its imperial white moustaches into the sky. And then the smell. Oh my God the smell. Klara clapped a hand to her mouth and nose. But to no avail. Vomit leaked from between her fingers as her body tried to force out the reek, the terrible, terrible stench. Death and corruption filled the air. Making Good Parks

12

It had been a big error to have neglected socks. By the time I passed the Mill my feet were sweaty and bruised. As, when it came down to it, was I. First years, as I pounded wearily over the bridge along Silver Street, bubbled merrily, skipping to avoid the traffic and exhibiting that blend of world-weariness and bragging bounce that is their foolish birthright. I could never do all that when I was an undergraduate. Too self-conscious. That way the studentry have of calling out each other’s names across the street. ‘Lucius! D’you go to that party in the end?’ ‘Kate!’ ‘Dave!’ ‘Mark, catchalater, guy!’ ‘Bridget, woah, babel’ If I weren’t part of it all I’d puke. I remembered a huge piece of graffiti along Downing Street, done round about the time of the collapse of Communism and still defiantly and screamingly legible on the brickwork of the Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. THE WALL IS NOT COMING DOWN HERE. KILLAGRAD 85 You could hardly blame any kid who grew up in Cambridge for redesigning himself as a class warrior. Imagine being surrounded your whole life through by all those floppy-haired Fabians and baseball-capped Brians with money and complexions and money and height and money and looks and money and books and money and money. Wankers. Wank-us! The class warriors shouted at you in football crowd chorus. Wank-uss! With accompanying hand gestures. Killagrad 85. The Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology should restore that faded lettering and treasure it as their most prized acquisition, an alfresco exhibit saying more than all their collections of plinthed Celtic amulets, spotlit Incan jars and Borneo nose bones.

13

A colleague in Oxford (how wonderful to be a graduate, a Junior Bye Fellow and to be able to use words like ‘colleague’) a colleague, yes a colleague, a Fellow Historian, told me about a photograph he saw on show in a gallery there. It was really two photographs, side by side, of two different bottle-banks, for the recycling of glass. The picture on the left was taken in Cowley, on the outskirts of the town, near the car factory. This bottle- bank was, as most are I guess, built in three sections, colour-coded to represent the three varieties of glass destined for each bin. There was a section painted white for clear glass, a green section for green and, three times the width of the other two, a brown section. The photograph next to it, which at first glance you thought was identical, showed another bottle-bank, but taken this time in the centre of Oxford, the university quarter. After a puzzled look, the difference hit you. A white section, a brown section and, get this, three times the width of the other two, a green section. What else do you need to know about the world? They should screen that photograph of those two bottle-banks at closedown while the national anthem plays. Not that I’m from a generation that gets angry at social injustice, everyone knows our lot don’t care. I mean bloody hell, it’s get-a-job city here and the devil take the wimp-most. Besides, I’m a historian. A historian, me. An historian if you please. I sat up, folded my arms and freewheeled past the University Press humming an Oily-Moily number. I’ll never be a woman I’ll never he you I must have lost count of how many bicycles I’d been through in the last seven years. This model, as it happened, was balanced enough to allow me to take my hands from the handlebars, which is a waycool thing I like to do. Bicycle theft at Cambridge is like car-radio theft in London or handbag snatching in Florence: which is to say en-bloody-demic. Every bike has a number elegantly and

14

uselessly painted on its rear mudguard. There was even a time, which ought to have been humiliating for the town, when they tried a Scheme. God save us from all Schemes, yeah? The town fathers bought thousands of bicycles, sprayed them green and left them in little bike- parks all over the city. The idea was that you hopped on one, got to where you wanted to be and then left it on the street for the next user. Such a cute idea, so William Morris, so Utopian, so dumb. Reader, you will be amazed to hear, astonished you will be, thunderstruck to learn, that within a week all the green bicycles had disappeared. Every single one. There was something so cute and trusting and hopeful and noble and aaaah! in the Scheme that the city ended up prouder, not humbler, for the deal. We giggled. And, when the council announced a new improved Scheme, we rolled over on the ground howling with laughter, begging them between gasps to stop. Trouble is, you can’t blade in Cambridge, too many cobbles. There’s a sad little In-Line Skating Soc and a Quad Soc which tries to pretend that Midsummer Common is Central Park, but it won’t wash, kids. Bikes it has to be and mountain bikes - in the flattest region of Britain, where a dog-turd excites the attentions of the Mountaineering Soc - they won’t wash either. Cambridge councillors love the word ‘park’. It is the one thing you can’t actually do in the town, so they use the word everywhere. Cambridge was just about the first place ever to offer Park ‘n’ Ride buses. It boasts a Science Park, Business Parks and of course the late lamented Bike Parks. I shouldn’t wonder if by the turn of the century we have Sex Parks and Internet Parks and Shop Parks and perhaps, as a wild throw, Park Parks with swings and slides. You can’t park in Cambridge for a number of reasons. It is a small medieval town, whose street widths are delimited by the lines of colleges facing each other, resolute and immovable as a chain of mountains. It becomes, in

15

vacation months, stuffed with tourists, foreign students and conventioneers. Above all, it is the capital city of the Fens, the only serious shopping centre for hundreds of thousands from Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, Hertfordshire, Suffolk and Norfolk, poor sods. In May however, in May, Cambridge belongs to the undergraduacy, to all the young dudes in their little scrubby goatees and neat sideburns. The colleges close their gates and one word rises above the centre of town, and swells to bursting like a huge water-filled balloon. Revision. Cambridge m May is Revision Park. The river and lawns, libraries, courts and corridors bloom with colourful young buds busting their brains over books. Panic, real panic, of a kind they never knew until the 1980s, washes over the third years like a tide. Examinations matter. The class of degree counts. Unless, like me, you did your final exams years ago, swotted like a specky, got a First, have completed your doctoral thesis and are now free. Free! I shouted to myself. Fur-reee! answered the coasting bike and the buildings whip-panning by. God, I loved myself that day. Enjoy the itch and bruise of your feet on the pedals. What the heckety have you got to be down about? How many, like you, can stand up and call themselves free? Free of Jane too. Still not quite sure what I felt about that. I mean, I have to admit she was, as it happens, my first ever real girlfriend. I was never like, one of the great and groovy studmuffins of the world as a student because … well, there’s no getting round it … I’m shy. I find it hard to meet people’s eyes. As my mother used to say of me (and in front of me) ‘he blushes in company you know’. That helped, obviously. I was only seventeen when I started at Uni, and being baby-faced and blushy and not confident with anybody, let alone girls, I kind of kept myself to myself. I didn’t

16

have school friends already there because I went to a state school that had never sent anyone to Cambridge before and I was crap at sports and journalism and acting and all the things that get you noticed. Crap at them because they get you noticed, I suppose. No, let’s be honest, crap at them because I was crap at them. So Jane was … well, she was my life. But now, way-hey! If I could complete a doctorate in four years and personally recaffeinate Safeway’s natural decaff, I didn’t need anyone. Every Fiona and Frances frowning over her Flaubert looked different to the new, free me as I freewheeled and freely dismounted at the gates of St Matthew’s and wheeled the freely ticking 4857M into the lodge, feeling free. Making News We Germans Alois pushed his bicycle through the gates and into the lodge. ‘Grufi Gott!’ Klingermann’s cheeriness on these inspection visits always irritated him. The man was supposed to be nervous. ‘Gott,’ he mumbled, somewhere between a greeting and an oath. ‘All quiet this morning. Herr Sammer sent a message on the telephone machine to say he couldn’t come in today. A summer cold.’ ‘Well, it wouldn’t be a winter cold in July, would it, boy?’ ‘No, sir!’ twinkled Klingermann, taking this to be a good joke, which irritated Alois more. And this fear of the telephone, calling it Das Telefon Ding, as though it were not the Future, but some demonic apparatus sent to perplex. Peasant attitude. Peasant attitudes were what held this country back. Alois walked coldly past Klingermann, sat at the desk, took a newspaper and a bottle of schnapps from his knapsack and settled down to read.

17

‘I beg pardon, sir?’ said Klingermann. Alois ignored him and threw the paper aside. He had only barked the one word scheijid He took a good pull of schnapps and gazed out of the window across the border poles and into Bavaria, into Germany, he begged its fucking pardon. Germany, where in Mannheim even now they were perfecting horseless transportation. Where they were building telephone networks to stretch across the nation and where that swine Bismarck was going to get what was coming to him. ‘We Germans fear God and nothing else in the world,’ the Old Pig had blustered in the Reichstag, expecting the Russians and French to pee in their pants at the might of his fancy Triple Alliance. ‘We Germans!’ What the hell was that supposed to mean? Conniving bastard, with his Danish wars and his you-can’t-join-in tongue stuck out at Austria. ‘We Germans’ were only what the Old Pig decided. Prussians. Shit-faced junkers. They decided. Westphalians could be Germans, oh yes. Hessians, Hamburgers, Thuringians and Saxons could be Germans. Even fucking Bavarians could be Germans. But not Austrians. Oh no. They could slum it with the Czechs and the Slavs and the Magyars and the Serbs. I mean, wasn’t it obvious, obvious even to an Arschloch like Bismarck, that the Austrians and the Germans had … oh, what was the use? It didn’t matter now, the Old Pig was going to get his. Piss-faced Wilhelm had been dead for weeks now, the mourning was over and Friedrich-Wilhelm was on the throne. Friedrich-Wilhelm and Bismarck detested each other, ha-ha! Goodbye Iron Chancellor! Good shitting riddance, Old Pig. Your days are numbered. A cart was moving towards them. Alois rose and straightened his tunic. He hoped it was a Bavarian and not a returning Austrian. A German. Whenever he came out to inspect a frontier post he loved to give Germans a hard time. Making Ready

18

The pigeon-hole Bill the Porter looked up from his window as I struggled in with the bike. I had suspected for a long time that he disapproved of me. ‘Morning, Mr Young.’ ‘Not for long, Bill.’ He looked puzzled. ‘Forecast’s good.’ ‘Not “Mister” for long,’ I said with a small blushing smile and held up the briefcase that housed the Meisterwerk. ‘I’ve finished my thesis!’ ‘Ho,’ said Bill and looked back down at his desk. Too much to expect him to take pleasure in my triumph. Who will ever penetrate the embarrassment of the late twentieth-century servant-master relationship? Even to call it a servant-master relationship is going a bit far. The porters had their Sirs, Ma’ams and bowler hats and we had the foolish, hearty and sycophantic grins that tried to make up for it all. We would never know what they called us behind our backs. They, presumably, would never know what we actually got up to all day. Perhaps it was the porters’ sons and daughters who wrote KiUqgrad 83 up on walls. Bill knew that some students stayed on, wrote doctoral theses and became fellows of the college, just as he knew that others flunked or went into the world to become rich, famous or forgotten. Maybe he cared, maybe he didn’t. Still, a bit more of Denholm Elliott in Trading Places and a bit less of Judith Anderson in Rebecca would have been welcome. I mean, you know? Yeah? Exactly. ‘Of course,’ I said weighing the briefcase in my hands with what I hoped was rueful modesty, ‘it has to be examined first …” A grunt was all I got out of that, so I turned to see what the post had brought me. A thick yellow parcel was poking from my pigeon-hole. Cool! I pulled it out tenderly. Printed on the address label was the logo of a German publishing house that specialised in history and academic texts. Seligmanns Verlag. I knew their name well from

19

research, but how the hey could they know my name? I’d never written to them. It seemed very odd. I certainly hadn’t ordered any books from them … unless of course, somehow, by reputation they had heard of me and were writing to ask if I would consent to their publishing my Meisterwerk. Coo-oool! For my thesis to be published was naturally the greatest, deepest, dearest, closest wish of my entire bosom. Seligmanns Verlag, woah, this was going to be a peach of a day. Whole dreams, visions and imaginative constructions of the future were building inside my head like time-lapsed film of skyscraper construction; timbers and king-posts, girders and joists winking into place to a cheeky xylophone track. I was already there, in the fully furnished and fully let Michael Young Tower, accepting awards and professorships and signing elegantly produced Seligmanns Verlag copies of my thesis (I could even see the colour of the book, the typeface, the jacket illustration and the dignified author photo and blurb) in the infinitesimal fraction of time between first seeing their label on the parcel and subsequently registering, with a squeal of brakes, a screeching of tyres and a billowing of airbags, the name of the actual addressee. Bit of a metaphorical shit heap there, but you know what I mean. ‘Professor L H Zuckermann’, it said. ‘St Matthew’s College, Cambridge. CB3 9BX.’ Oh. Not Michael Young MA, then. I looked at the pigeon-hole immediately beneath mine. It was crammed to overflowing with letters, flyers and notes. Alphabetically the last, below even ‘Young, Mr M D’ came ‘Zuckermann, Prof. I stared at the dymo label, hot with disappointment. ‘Damn,’ I said, trying to wedge the package into its proper home. ‘Sir?’

20

‘Oh, nothing. It’s just that there’s this thing in my pigeonhole for Professor Zuckermann and his pigeonhole’s full.’ ‘If you’ll give it to me, sir, I’ll see that he gets it.’ ‘It’s all right, I’ll take it to him. He might be able to help me with … with an introduction to some publishers. Where’s he hang out?’ ‘Hawthorn Tree Court, sir. 2A.’ ‘Who is he, in fact?’ I asked, sliding the package into my briefcase. ‘Never come across him.’ ‘He is Professor Zuckermann,’ was the prim reply. Officialdom. Teh. Making Trouble Diabolo ‘But I am a German!’ ‘No, you are nothing. These papers tell me you are nothing. Nothing at all. You do not exist.’ ‘One day! They are out of date by one day, that is all.’ ‘Sir, this gentleman comes through all the time,’ Klingermann gave Alois an uncomfortable look. ‘He is … he is well known to me. I can. vouch for him.’ ‘Oh, you can vouch for him, can you Klingermann? And why do you think the Imperial Government in Vienna spends a fortune every month on papers, stamps, passports and vouchers, then? For fun? What do you think a voucher is? It is a stamped piece of paper to be carried around at all times, legitimising the bearer. Or does this non-existent citizen of nowhere imagine that he will carry you around as his voucher?’ ‘But as a German, I am allowed free passage into Austria!’ ‘But you are not a German. You may have been, from these papers, a German yesterday. But today, today you are no one and nothing.’ ‘I have a living to make, a family to support!’ ‘I have a living to make, a family to support … ?’ ‘I have a living to make, a family to support, sir.’ ‘So have Austrian carpenters a living to make and families to support, sir! For every one of these tawdry pieces of

21

German crap that is bought here, bread is taken from the mouth of an Austrian carpenter.’ ‘Sir, with respect, they are not pieces of crap, they are toys, handmade with love and with care and, so far as I am aware, no one in Austria makes them at all, so I can hardly be said to be taking bread from the mouths of anybody.’ ‘But the money that is spent by poor, respectable Austrian parents on these corrupting German trinkets would otherwise be spent on healthy food grown by Austrian farmers. I see no reason why I, as the Emperor’s accredited agent, should allow such a state of affairs. Do you?’ ‘Corrupting? Sir, they are the most innocent …’ ‘What are they called? Hm? Tell me that. What are they called?’ ‘Sir?’ ‘What is their name? ‘Diabolos, Sir. You must have seen them before …” ‘Diabolos, precisely. Diabolo is the Italian for devil. Satan. The Corrupter. And you call them innocent.1′ ‘But, Herr Zollbeamter, they are only called diabolo because they are … they are fiendishly difficult. To master. A challenge, a test of co-ordination and balance. Fun!’ ‘Fun, Herr Tischlermeisteri You think it Jun that the youth of Austria should waste time that would otherwise be profitably spent in study or manly exercise on some satanic German toy?’ ‘Sir, perhaps … perhaps you would like to try one yourself? Here … a gift. I think you will find them harmless and amusing.’ ‘Oh dear,’ Alois licked his lips. ‘Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear. A bribe. How unfortunate. A bribe. Dear me. Klingermann! Form ki 171, plenty of sealing wax and an Imperial Stamp!’ Making Friends The History Muse

22

Diabolical Thought Number One occurred to me on my way to Zuckermann’s rooms. I had passed through the Porter’s Lodge and was walking around Old Court towards the archway that led to Hawthorn Tree. I might legitimately have been able to short cut across, not around the court, but I wasn’t exactly sure that I was entitled to walk on the grass. The sign said ‘Fellows Only’ and I had never plucked up the nerve to ask if this included Junior Bye Fellows. I mean, it sounds so feeble to put the question. You know, as if you’ve just been made a prefect at school and you want to find out if that means you can wear trainers or call the teachers by their Christian names. Wet, or what? Assert yourself, Michael, that’s the thing. I mean, how much more has to happen to you before you’ll believe that you’ve got as much right as anyone to inhabit the earth? A new attitude is needed: some dignity, some gravitas, something consonant with our new position in life … These amiable thoughts were interrupted by a rumbling, a tumbling and a squawking as I passed the open stone doorway of F staircase in the corner of the courtyard. A figure rushed out in a squeaking blur and stamped across the lawn. He was carrying a pile of CDs, a plaster bust, three velvet cushions and a rolled-up poster. I knew him for Edward Edwards, Double Eddie, someone with even less right than me to walk across the grass. He shared rooms and a life with another second year, James McDonell. They enjoyed embarrassing me by cat-calling me and shouting, ‘get that tush? or ‘ker-yoot!’ and other such shit when I walked past. A very sweet pair really, but prone to enacting hysterical scenes and bruiting abroad the supposedly superior virtues of their sexuality. Double Eddie was shedding CDs at a great rate across the lawn. ‘Woah!’ I called after him. ‘You’ve dropped these.’ Double Eddie didn’t turn round or stop walking. His angry back turned to me, he just said, ‘Don’t care!’ and sniffed.

23

Oh dear, I thought. Another row. I followed him, treading the grass gingerly, like a responsible father testing the ice to see if it will bear the weight of his children. Behind us a voice shrieked out clear and high, echoing off the stonework and windows of the court. I looked round to see James framed in F staircase doorway, eyes flashing and arms akimbo. ‘Simply come back!’ he screamed. Still Double Eddie strode on. ‘Never!’ he said, without a backward glance. ‘Never, never, never, never, never. ‘OH’ Now Bill the Porter had emerged grimly from his lodge. ‘Off the grass, gents, if you please.’ Since Double Eddie had already reached the other side of the lawn and Bill had used an unambiguous plural, there now was the answer to my question about Junior Bye Fellows and lawns. Verboten. As Double Eddie stalked through the lodge trying, without success, to whistle jauntily, I started to pick up the fallen CDs, blushing furiously under the porter’s eye. ‘Sorry!’ I mumbled. ‘I’ll just get these and …’ Bill nodded grimly and watched my too much haste and not enough speed fumblings. ‘Festina lente. Eile mit Weile,’ I babbled to myself. When you’re an academic and under pressure, you blather in Latin tags and foreign languages to remind yourself of your superiority. It never works. I clumsily collected together Cabaret, Gypsy, Carousel, Sweeney Todd and the rest and tripped quickly back to James, who leaned against the doorway, his eyes wet with tears. ‘Urn, here you are then.’ His hand fended them away. ‘I don’t want the horrid things! You can burn them for all I care.’ I put a hand to his heaving shoulder. I’ll keep them for you then. Listen, I’m really sorry,’ I said. ‘I mean, it’s a bummer. Being jilted.’ He said nothing, so I continued,

24

this time offering him all the benefit of my recent experience. ‘I should know, man. I’ve been ditched too, you know?’ He stared at me as though I were mad. I thought perhaps he was going to tell me that in my case it wasn’t the same thing at all. Instead he wailed that it simply wasn’t fair. Then he turned away and stomped up the stairs, leaving me with the CDs. No, it isn’t, I thought as I miserably trailed my laces through the archway and cut into the car-park, it simply isn’t fair at all. To be left is indeed the bummeriest bummer of all. How to separate the humiliation from the loss, that’s the catch. You can never be sure if what tortures you is the pain of being without someone you love or the embarrassment of admitting that you have been rejected. I had already been playing with the idea of persuading Jane back so that I could be the one to do the jilting, just to even things up. And in the car-park thar she blew: four thousand quidswotth of Renault Clio. My Killer Loops on the dash, I noticed. Bloody having them. I dropped the briefcase on the ground by the car, scrabbled out my set of keys, opened the door and put them on. Does one assert one’s self more or less when wearing dark glasses? You’re hiding your eyes, which ought to count as timorous and weak, but then you’re looking cool and way inscrutable. There again, you can’t see so well in a car. I could make out a tube of mints in the floor-well, they were mine for sure. Remembered buying them at a service station. Come to think of it, half those tapes belonged to me too. I grabbed as many as I could hold. General mixture: bit, of Pulp, Portishead, Kinks, Verdi, Tchaik, Blur, the Morricone and Alfred Newman collections and of course all my beloved Oily-Moily. She could keep the Mariah Carey, the k. d. lang, the Wagner and the Bach, reckoned. Severed childless relationships in this age revolve around the custody of record collections, so it’s essential to get your claim in first.

25

That was when Diabolical Thought Number One actually hit. I leaned further into the car and yanked the college parking permit from the inside of the windscreen and tore it up into tiny little shreds. Hee-hee. Diabolical Thought Number Two struck as the tapes joined Double Eddie’s opera CDs in my briefcase and I came upon that little bottle of Liquid Paper. For a man of the keyboard generation I have to confess I do have top hand-writing. My godmother gave me an Osmiroid Calligraphy Set for Christmas when I was about fourteen and I really got into it for a while. You know, forming the letters properly, two strokes for an ‘o’, the dinky upward italic serifs on the descenders and ascenders, thick thin, thick thin, all nicely proportioned, the whole ball of wax. Should have seen my thank-you letters that year. Storming. I leaned over the bonnet of the Renault like a suspect assuming the position for a US Highway Patrolman, poked my tongue out of one side of the mouth and got to work. It struck me as likely that the solvents in Liquid Paper would do something fabulously corrosive to the paintwork making my little message of love extremely difficult to remove without a whole boring, time- consuming and highly expensive respray. Cool. This, surely then, was the assertive Michael Young we had been looking for. My heart went thump-a-thump-a-thump as I stood back to get the full effect. Never really done anything like this before. Felt like shoplifting or buying pornography. The lettering was not as large as I would have liked, but a small bottle of Liquid Paper won’t go far, even on the compact bonnet of a Clio. Nonetheless, the effect of white on Dubonnet Red was striking, and the wording, I reckoned, more or less on the money. I Have Been Stolen By A Mad Bitch I stood admiring this for a little while, wondering whether or not I should also have a go at removing that pathetic, absolutely pathetic, sticker on the rear window,

26

GENETICISTS DO IT IN VITRO hardi-fucking-har, when I realised it must be nearing eleven. I still had to deliver Zuckermann’s bloody parcel, drop off the Meisterwerk in Fraser-Stuart’s rooms and get to my own where a first year would be awaiting a supervision. If I remembered rightly she was late with a Castlereagh and Canning essay, on whose delivery I had sweetly granted two extensions already. She could expect the shortest of short short shrifts from me if she was late again. I, who had completed a two hundred thousand word thesis of closely reasoned, intensely researched, innovatively presented, elegantly phrased historical argument was not going to have any truck with lazy, shiftless undergraduates, however good my mood. No more Mr Nice Guy. Meet Dr Nasty. I stooped to pick up the briefcase when IT happened. The most dreadful thing that could have happened did happen. A really shitty thing on its own, but which set in train what was possibly the shittiest event (or non-event) in the history of humanity. Of course, I couldn’t have known that at the time. At the time, the personal disaster represented by this shitty happening was all that consumed me; believe me it was bad enough in its own right, without knowing that the destinies of millions hung on the event, without having even the vaguest idea that I was setting in train the explosion of everything I knew. What happened was this. As I picked up my briefcase by its handle, the clasp, worn’ from years of handling and toting and tugging and hefting and lugging and kicking and dropping and schlepping, chose this moment to give way. Maybe it was the unaccustomed burden of Double Eddie’s CDs, my music tapes, the Meisterwerk and that incorrectly pigeon-holed package from Seligmanns Verlag. Whatever. The brass three-tiered plaque that received the tongue of the clasp broke free from its rotten stapled moorings, pulling open the perished mouth of the briefcase and sending four hundred unbound pages of closely reasoned, intensely





Unknown




27

researched, innovatively presented, elegantly phrased historical argument into the eddying tornadoes of mid- May breeze that swirled around the car-park. ‘Oh not I howled. ‘Please no.’ No, no, no, no, no, no!’ as I chased from corner to corner snatching at the flurry of flying pages like a kitten swatting snowflakes. There’s a TV programme where celebrities do this with money. A thousand currency notes are sent into the air by a wind machine and the sleb has to get hold of as many as possible. ‘Grab A Grand’ it’s called. Presented by that guy who looks like Kenneth Branagh in bearded Shakespearean mode. Edmunds, Noel Edmunds. Or possibly Edmonds. Most of the table of contents had landed under the wheels of my/Jane’s Renault in a safe bunch. The rest, the mighty body of the noble work, including appendices, tables, bibliography, index and acknowledgements, flew free. Bending double to hold the rescued pages against my chest, I staggered from one whirl of paper to the next, clutching and clawing like a herring gull. Yes, all right, I can’t have been like a kitten swatting snowflakes and a herring gull. ‘God in helling pants, no! Come here, you bastards!’ I screamed. ‘Please!’ But I was not alone. ‘Dear, dear! This is unfortunate.’ I turned to see an old man walking slowly through the car-park, calmly picking up page after page. It seemed to me, in my fever and frenzy and grateful though I was for assistance, that it was all right for him, for everywhere he went the currents of air seemed to be stilled and the pages just fluttered lifelessly to the ground, content for him to pick them up. That couldn’t be happening. But I stopped and stared and saw that it was happening. It really was. Really. Wherever he walked, the wind dropped before him. Like the wizard calming the

28

brooms and dishes in the Sorcerer’s Apprentice sequence in Fantasia. Which cast me, of course, as Mickey Mouse. The old man turned to me. ‘It is better if you approach from windward,’ he said, germanically pronouncing the Ws as Vs, ‘your body will shelter the papers.’ ‘Oh,’ I said. ‘Thanks. Yeah. Thank you.’ ‘And you should maybe do up your laces?’ There’s always some wise-arse, isn’t there? Someone who can make it look like you have absolutely no common sense. My father was like that until he learned better than to try to teach me the most rudimentary elements of carpentry or sailing. Then he died before I could repay him by showing any interest at all. This wise-arse was bearded, favouring the Tolstoy model over the Branagh- Shakespearean, and continued to step serenely through the car-park picking up the loose pages that lay down and played dead at his bidding. The Vindvood’ technique kind of worked for me too and we both shuttled back and forth between the fallen pages and that landed fish of a dead, gasping briefcase. Once all the visible paper had been gathered, I checked under each car and got myself as good and filthy and bleeding and torn on the outside as I was feeling on the

m. The last page to be found was lying face down on the bonnet of the Clio, stuck to the drying Liquid Paper. I peeled it gently off. This disaster only put me a day behind, of course. I mean, everything was there on hard disk back at our house in the village of Newnham but it wasn’t, you know, it just wasn’t a good omen. It meant buying another five hundred sheets of laserprinter paper and … well, somehow it scraped the gilt off the gingerbread, that’s what I felt. The celebrations last night, the £62.00 Chateauneuf du Pape, that feeling of freedom as I had bicycled into town … all premature. A cloud went over the sun and I shivered. The Old Man was standing absolutely still and staring at one of the pages of the Meisterwerk. 29

‘Thanks so much,’ I panted pinkly. ‘Stupidest thing. Must get a new briefcase.’ He looked up at me and something there was in that look, something that even then I could plainly recognise as monumental. A thing absolutely eternal and unutterable. He returned the piece of paper he had been reading with a stiff bow. I saw that it was Page 49, from the first section of Das Meisterwerk, the part that covered the legitimisation of Alois right up to the marriage with Klara Polzl. ‘What is this, please?’ he asked. ‘It’s, uh, my doctoral thesis,’ I said. ‘You are a graduate?’ I was accustomed to the surprise in his voice. I looked too young to be a graduate. Frankly, I looked too young to be an undergraduate sometimes. Maybe I would have to start trying to grow a beard again. If I had the testosterone that is. I had tried last year and the flak had nearly driven me to self-slaughter. I pinkened more and nodded. ‘Why?’ he asked, nodding down at the paper in his hand. ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘Why that subject? Why?’ ‘Why?’ ‘Yes. Why?’ Well …’ I mean, everyone knows how you choose a subject for a doctoral thesis in history. You go round the libraries in a fever, looking for a subject that no one else has covered, or at least a subject that hasn’t been covered for, say, twenty years and then you bag it. You stake your claim for that one seam. Everyone knows that. But the look the old man was giving me was of such imponderable gravity that I didn’t know how to begin to answer him, so I gave a helpless shrug and smiled stupidly at the ground. Jane was always giving me grief for this feeble tactic, but I just couldn’t ever help it.

30

‘What is your name?’ he asked, not harshly as one who has a good mind to report you to the authorities, but in a kind of bewilderment, with a high upward inflection, as if astonished and slightly frightened that he had not been told it long before. ‘Michael Young.’ ‘Michael Young,’ he repeated, again with puzzlement. ‘And you are a graduate? Here? At this college?’ I nodded and he looked up at the clouds covering the sun behind me. ‘I can’t see your face properly,’ he said. ‘Oh,’ I said. ‘I’m sorry.’ I moved round so that he could get a better look. Absolutely surreal. What was he, a plastic surgeon? A portrait painter? What had my face got to do with anything? ‘No, no. The sunglasses.’ With emphasis on the second syllable, ’sun-glasses’, definitely German, perhaps a little east or south. I whipped off the Killer Loops, which made me even shyer and we stood there looking at each other. Well, he was looking, I was stealing quick glances from under my lashes like the young Lady Di. He was bearded and old, as I have said. A lined face and a worn one, but hard to date exactly. Academics age in ways different from most people. Some remain unnaturally smooth and youthful well into their seventies, the boyish, sandy-haired Alan Bennetty type, which is how I supposed I would ripen. Others senesce prematurely and will begin to peer and blink and hunch like little library moles well before forty. This man reminded me of that photograph of … Chief Joseph is it? Or Geronimo? One of those figures. W H Auden in his sixties anyway. That in turn made me think of what David Hockney said, on first catching sight of the elderly Auden: ‘Blimey, if that’s his face, what can his scrotum look like?’ This old man, judging from the crags and trenches on his forehead must have had something like a savoy cabbage swinging in his trousers. The beard was white at the roots

31

and it gradated, if that’s a word, into a mid-grey at the raggedy wiry ends. I’m not sure what he saw as he looked back at me: twenty-four, all my hair, none of it facial, and, yes all right damn you, a baseball cap. Whatever he did see was enough, at any rate, to bring out his right hand to shake mine. ‘Leo Zuckermann,’ he said. ‘Professor Zuckermann?’ Get out of here. The man himself. ‘I am a Professor, yes.’ ‘Oh. Well. I’ve got something for you, actually.’ The parcel from Seligmanns Verlag was lying face down on the ground. I brushed some crud away and handed it over. ‘It was in my pigeon-hole, which is above yours. Yours was full, so I …’ ‘Ah yes. Xenakis, Young, Zuckermann. X,Y,Z.’ He preferred ‘zee’ to ‘zed’, which fitted the slightly Americanised swing to his accent. ‘I’m so sorry. I am sadly neglectful of clearing my pigeon-holes.’ ‘No worries. Fine.’ ‘Not your only copy, I hope?’ he said, gesturing at the shambles in my suitcase. ‘AH backed up on computer, I am sure?’ ‘No. But it’s still a pain.’ ‘God’s punishment.’ ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘For taking rejection with such ill-grace.’ He pointed, smilingly, towards the bonnet of the Clio and its message of love. ‘Yeah,’ I said. ‘Childish.’ He looked at me intently. ‘You, I should say, are a coffee man.’ ‘A coffee man?’ ‘From the way you skip and jump in the air when excited. A coffee man. I am a hot chocolate man. Would you be pleased to come and visit my rooms some time soon? For coffee?’

32

‘Coffee? Right. Mm. Yeah. Why not? Sure. Thanks. Absolutely. Great.’ Managing to avoid only ‘cheers’ and ‘lovely’ in the meaningless litany of polite British English. ‘What day? What time? I am free all this afternoon.’ ‘Er … oh, this afternoon? Today? Sure! Yeah. Lovely. That be great. I’m … I’ve got to get this all printed out again but ‘So what we say? Half past four-ish?’ ‘Sounds great to me, thanks. And thanks for helping with the … you know. Thanks.’ ‘I think probably you have thanked me enough.’ ‘What? Oh. Yes. Sorry.’ ‘Tshish!’ he said. Well it sounded like ‘tshish’ anyway, and was meant, I suppose, to indicate foreign amusement at the English disease of being unable, once started, to stop thanking and apologising. We walked backwards away from each other as academics do. ‘Half past four then,’ I said. ‘Hawthorn Tree Court,’ he said, ‘2A.’ ‘Right,’ I said. ‘Thanks. I mean sorry. Cheers. Cool.’ Making Love Feathers and claws and fur Klara lay underneath him and thought of daisies. Daisies, cowbells, milk-yokes, hay, the Mondsee choir at Easter Mass, anything, anything but the stink and weight and grunt of the Bastard wallowing above her. His previous two wives must have been able to bear it, just as they had been able to bear him babies that lived. Perhaps this will be the one, she thought. This time. Not like poor Frieda Braun who had miscarried just that afternoon after pumping the water from the cistern and smelling that awful stench and seeing a torrent of maggots stream into her pail. Poor Frieda. And now the cistern was emptied and they must borrow water from the people across the street, like peasants. Poor Frieda. She too had so wanted a child.

33

A little girl, Klara prayed. A sweet little girl, Lilli, whom she would teach secretly to love the mountains and the fields and to despise the hateful stuffy towns; The Bastard had said this evening that he wanted to move the family soon to Linz. Linz which was huge compared to Brunau. Linz, which made Klara think of feathers and claws and fur. The feathers in women’s hats, the bright blue ostrich feathers in vases in the coloured tile hallways, the feathers fanned in stained- glass above the front doors and the feathers of the stuffed birds in clear domes on the black oak sideboards in the dining-rooms. Feathers and claws and fur. Deer claws with jewels set in them for brooches. Fox fur around the necks of the dowager-humped women; not just fox fur but the whole fox, the complete animal: feet, head, eyes, teeth, the V-shaped jaw bared in a grin, the entire beast flattened and dried like salted cod, like paper that can’t be torn. They bring the country into the town, she thought. They kill the animals to wear them or to keep them in glass domes or they skin them into shiny town-shoes and tan luggage. The horses they make pull buses through the towns all their lives before they boil them into glue or flay them into sofa stuffing and violin bows. The trees are thrown into furnaces to drive the machines and overheat the houses or they are carved into oak-leaf clusters, with acorns and nuts and briar, then stained all dark and brooding and dead. The flowers are dried and dyed and set in sprays on the pianos on squares of fringed silk. The whole wide, light countryside itself is oiled onto canvas as dark thundering mountains, misty booming ravines and tumultuous heavy clouds and then hung on the walls of gloomy passageways lit by dull hissing gas-mantles to frighten children into a permanent terror of the world outside the city. How can anybody bear the town? Blood and iron and gas. Daisies. Think of daisies. But daisies are goose-flowers. Goose-flowers, goose-flesh. Flesh that crawls and prickles under his wet touch.

34

She had known this would be a love-night, as he called them. Liebesnacht. She had known, because he had not beaten her or looked like beating her, even after she had spilled soup into his lap at dinner. Not a glance towards Pnina on the wall, just a ghastly smile and a playful slap on the hand accompanied by the word ‘naughty!’, mockingly, in the falsetto of a governess. Such a vile smirk, as if he knew that his love was infinitely more terrible to her than his brutal fists. How long he took about it! Klara remembered her sister joking of her husband Hermann and his impossible and wholly unsatisfactory speed. ‘Out before he was in!’ Then Hermann was a country boy who only drank on saint’s days and holidays, not a man of fifty - heavens! Fifty-one. Alois was fifty-one last month - whose joke was that he only drank on Wednesdays or days with a letter G in them. Montag, Dienstag, Mittwoch, Donnerstag, Freitag, Samstag, Sontag. Klara arched back her neck and gazed with longing at the Virgin on the wall above the headboard. Alois, after slithering out seven or eight times and swearing like a carter, seemed, at long last, to be getting there. She recognised the more frantic rhythms and waited for the final animal plunges. Sky, she thought. Sky, lakes, forests, rabbits and eagles. Yes, a huge eagle to swoop down from his lair in the mountains and snatch away this squealing pig. A great soaring, all-powerful, all-seeing, all-conquering eagle with piercing eyes and mighty wings and talons that dripped with the blood of the pig! Making Up Little orange pills Red fluid dripped into one of those spiralling, screw-like doo-dads they so love and I stared at it fascinated. Jane’s work was a dark mystery to me, which was the way she liked it, but there was no denying the pleasing prettiness of the paraphernalia it employed. Metres and metres of

35

retort stands and capillaries and clear plastic tubing that went round and round, up and down, in and out, clockwise and anticlockwise, zigwise and zagwise. And centrifuges there were, sexy beyond anything. I had often watched her take a tiny stained dot of something bright and gloopy and fire a syringe gun with a delicate plip into little test-tubes arranged in a tight round drum like hungry nestlings. When all the glass mouths had been fed the drum would be set spinning. The chrome precision and low hum of it all were just bitching. So much more solidly built than a dishwasher or tumble-dryer. No vibration at all, just solid, smooth and scientific, like Jane herself. And on another bench I liked to look at coloured slides of gel with elegant marblings of another colour running down the middle, like something in a confectioner’s pantry or maybe like the wavy threads of blood you find in the yolk of an egg. Jane called her lab The Kitchen; the coming together of stainless steel and glass with coloured organic goo and bright liquids brought out the little boy in me, the helpful, heel-kicking son who liked to watch his mother beating the batter and rolling the dough. Big business of course, genespottmg. You pretend to the world that you are working on a grand scheme called the Human Genome Project, which is worthy and noble - Nobel, in fact - Good Science, Human Achievement, Frontiers of Knowledge, all of that, but really you are trying to find a new gene and copyright the pants out of it before anyone else stumbles across it too. There were dozens of commercial ‘biotechnical’ companies in Cambridge alone. God knows what kind of bribery and badness they got up to. Not that Jane was corruptible of course. Never. Sometimes I called her on the nature of her work. What would you do if you discovered that there really was a gay gene? Or that black people have less verbal intelligence than white? Or that Asians are better at numbers than Caucasians? Or that Jews are congeni-tally

36

mean? Or that women are dumber than men? Or men dumber than women? Or that religion is a genetic disposition? Or that this very gene determined criminal tendencies and that very gene determined Alzheimer’s? You know, the insurance ramifications, the ammo it would hand to the racists. All that? She would say that she would cross that bridge when she came to it and that, besides, her work was in a different field. Anyway, if you, as a historian, discovered that Churchill was screwing the Queen all through the war, would that be your problem? You report the facts. Shared humanity has the job of interpreting them. Same with science. It wasn’t Darwin’s problem that God didn’t create Adam and Eve, it was the bishops’ problem. Don’t blame the messenger, she’d say calmly, grow up and look to yourself instead. I flicked the side of the dripping tube with my fingernail. Donald, Jane’s research assistant, had scuffed awkwardly off to find her ten minutes earlier. I heard a door bang down the corridor and straightened up. She did not like things to be touched. ‘Well, bugger me. It’s actually here. It’s actually got the face to stand here and confront us.’ ‘Hi, baby …’ ‘What have you touched? Show mother what you’ve fiddled with and fucked with, so we don’t have to find out later.’ ‘Nothing! I haven’t touched anything … well, I did just tap that tube there. The liquid was getting stuck so I helped it through. That’s all.’ Jane stared at me in horror. ‘That’s all? That’s all)’ She shrieked at the door, ‘Donald! DonaW! Get in here! We’ll have to start again. Ten weeks work down the fucking plughole. Christ1.’ Donald came hurrying through. ‘What? What is it? What’s he done? What’s he done?’ ‘Jane, it was the gentlest tap, I swear

37

‘The stupid dick only jogged the methyl orange reagent through the tartration pipe.’ ‘Bloody hell, Jane,’ I wailed, ‘it can’t have made that much difference surely?’ Donald stared at the pipework. ‘Oh Jesus,’ he said. ‘No! No!’ He fell against the workbench and buried his face in his hands. I breathed a sigh of relief and turned to face Jane. ‘That was a bloody cruel trick, actually. If Donald weren’t such a pathetic liar I’d've been really upset.’ Jane’s eyebrows flew up. ‘Oh,’ she said, ‘that was a cruel trick, was it? I see. You would have been upset.’ ‘Look, I know what you’re going to say ‘Defacing my car, getting it towed from college for illegal parking. These were not cruel upsetting tricks, were they? These were the sweet reflexes of a loving, tortured soul. They were romantic games born in a beautiful, complex mind. Not childish, but mature. An ironic commentary on love and exchange. A most wonderful compliment. I should be grateful.’ I just hate it when she gets like that. And Donald giggling as if he knew what she was on about. ‘Yeah, yeah, yeah,’ I said, throwing up a hand. ‘Cool.’ ‘Leave us, Donald,’ said Jane, settling herself on a stool. ‘I need to have a conversation with this piece of work.’ Donald, like me a ready flusher, backed dorkily from the room. ‘Ho. Yes. Right, for sure. I’ll … yes. K.’ I waited for the flapping of the doors to subside before daring to look up into that mocking gaze. ‘I’m sorry,’ I said. The words fell with a thud into an achingly long silence. It wasn’t really a mocking gaze. I could have attached any property to it. I could have described it as a cool gaze, an ironical gaze. Or an appraising gaze. It was Jane’s gaze and to anyone else it might have appeared a) friendly, b) sweet, c) amused, d) provocative, e) sexy, f) forbidding, g) sceptical, h) admiring, i) passionate, j) whorish, k) dull, 1) intellectual, m) contemptuous, n)

38

embarrassed, o) afraid, p) insincere, q) desperate, r) bored, s) contented, t) hopeful, u) enquiring, v) steely, w) angry, v) expectant, x) disappointed, y) penetrating, or z) relieved. It was all of these things. I mean, it was a pair of human eyes, the mirror of the soul. Not the mirror of her soul, but of mine. I looked into them feeling like ten types of tit and so, naturally, a mocking gaze was what I got in return. Suddenly, to my surprise, she smiled, leaned forward and stroked the back of my head. ‘Oh, Pup,’ she said. ‘What am I going to do with you?’ A word about the Pup business. People call me Pup. It’s, like this. You’re due to clock in at a big university wearing a jacket, tie and chinos, as bought by Mummy specially for the occasion. Your name is Michael. You’re younger than anyone else by two years and this is virtually the first time you’ve been away from home. What do you do? Your train journey from Winchester to Cambridge means you have to cross London to get from one station to the other. So, you hit the West End, returning with a serious haircut, way baggy trousers, a T-shirt saying ‘Suck My Soul’, a khaki parka and the name Puck. You reboard the next train to Cambridge reborn as a dude with attitude. It was more or less okay to say ‘dude’ and ‘with attitude’ eight years ago. Nowadays of course, only advertisers and journalists talk like that. What they say for real on the street today I’ve less than no idea. I dropped out of that race early on after I’d been lapped twice and told to get out of the fucking way. I chose Puck because I’d played him in a school production of A Midsummer Night’s Dream and I thought it kind of suited me. Spike, Yash, Blast, Spit, Fizzer, Jog, Streak, Flick, Boiler, Zug, Klute, Growler - I’d considered them all. Puck seemed to be cool without being too

39

aggressive. Unfortunately, at my first dinner in Hall there had been a mix-up. ‘Hi,’ said this totally uncool bloke in jacket and tie sitting himself beside me. Tm Mark Taylor. You must be a fresher, yeah?’ I gave him my cool new name, but my mouth was full of food and somehow he got it into his specky head that I had introduced myself as Puppy Young. ‘Puppy? Yeah, I see that. Puppy. Right.’ No amount of spluttering denial led to anything and Puppy or Pup I became. It wasn’t a blow that I ever really recovered from in terms of the kind of homeboy, down by law, yo motherfuckah, sound, bitching, slamming, street, phat, gangsta, waycool cool that I had reckoned on achieving. Maybe Snoop Doggy Dog of South Central, Los Angeles, California could have got away with calling himself Snoop Puppy Pup, but Michael Young of East Dene, Andover, Hampshire didn’t have a fucking prayer. Jane loved it of course. Loved calling me Pup, Pups and Puppy. Which explained in part the little outbreak that led to me graffiting the bonnet of her Renault. Her Renault? I meant our Renault. See? She was winning already. That’s to say - yes, I liked going out with an older woman. Two years apart maybe doesn’t really count as Older Woman, but I still got a kick out of just that small difference. Yes, I liked being mothered a bit. Yes, I quite enjoyed the salty slap of her gentle mocking, but NO I am not a eunuch or a masochist. Part of me likes just once in a while to be a Man. And I felt, frankly I felt … ‘I know what you felt last night,’ she said. ‘You thought I was jealous. You thought I didn’t like the idea of your thesis being finished. We’d both be Doctors then, and we’d both be equal. You thought that irritated me.’ ‘That couldn’t be further from the truth!’ I said, which couldn’t have been further from the truth. ‘And perhaps you thought that I didn’t take History very seriously compared with my work.’

40

‘Absolutely notl’ I lied again. ‘Oh/ Jane lifted her eyebrows in genuine surprise. ‘Really? Because I was thinking that. All those things. It did annoy me that you were about to get a doctorate. And having to watch you strut about the place like a bantam. I mean face it dear, a lesser woman would have thrown up.’ 1 was happy, that’s all.’ ‘And I did think to myself, what’s a history doctorate? Anyone with half a brain can eat the fruits of a library for a few months and then crap out a long glistening thesis. It doesn’t involve thought, or calculation or work. Not real work. Just pretentious dilettante posturing.’ ‘Oh, thanks! Thanks a heap.’ ‘I know, Puppy, I know. It was only for a while. I was jealous. I was resentful.’ ‘Oh: ‘I’m sorry. I’m pleased you’ve finished your thesis now. I’m proud of you.’ Absolute genius for feinting and sidestepping and slithering, has Jane. She’ll make all the points against herself before you get the chance and then apologise for them sweetly and bravely, leaving good grace as the only option. ‘About the car,’ I said, looking down, ‘it was childish of me.’ ‘Oh fuck the car. Who gives a shit about the car? It’s a car, not a kitten or a declaration of human rights. Fuck it twice. And, at the risk of rousing your manly ire once more, you have to admit that it was one of the few brave, amusing and independent things you’ve ever done. Besides, I lied about it being towed away, and as it happens the graffiti disappeared with one wipe of Freon, so what harm was done?’ ‘So that means … er … we’re still together again?’ ‘Come here you,’ she said and pulled my head towards hers. We kissed long and hard and, coming up for air, I babbled my thanks. Inside … well, maybe I wasn’t so

41

sure. I had been getting used to the idea of feeling let down, betrayed and spat out. There was a kind of comfort in the bruises of hurt and misuse. But then you see I loved her. I really loved her. I still get a thrill When you ter-ter-ter-touch me. It was true. Oily-Moily were never wrong. Every time her flesh contacted mine I got a rush. So, what the hey, we kissed and I told freedom goodbye. She’s taller than me: that doesn’t mean much, most people are taller than me. She’s dark where I’m light. A lot of people take her for an Italian or a Spaniard. I call her my raven-haired gypsy temptress, at which she groans good-naturedly. She’s very clean. That sounds strange but is true. Not just nearly clean, as the TV commercials say, but really clean. Her hands are always fresh and neat and her lab coat and clothes never wrinkle or sag. There is just this sweet endearing clumsiness, an awkward stiff suggestion of uncoordination; as with Ingrid Bergman’s hint-of-a-squint, it’s the tiny, almost imperceptible flaw that magnifies the beauty. ‘Tell you what,’ I said. ‘I’ll go to Sainsbury’s and tonight we’ll cook a really good dinner. Get it right this time. How’s that?’ She looked down at me. ‘You know Pup,’ she said, ‘if you were any more cute I would have to pickle you in formaldehyde.’ ‘Shucks,’ I went, and picked up a little perspex dish of bright orange pills from the bench, shaking them in an embarrassed South American rhythm. ‘Hm,’ I said, picking one of them up and holding it between forefinger and thumb. ‘What kind of a high do these offer then?’ ‘Shit, will you put that down? She made a grab for the dish, suddenly wild with anger, and missed, sending pills all over the worktop and the floor. I’d never seen her like that. A frenzy, a real frenzy. ‘Hey!’ I cried in protest, as she roughly pushed me away from the bench. ‘Why will you never learn to leave aloneY

42

She threw herself off the stool and began to gather the scattered pills cursing herself and me and life and God as she did so. This was beyond real. I joined her on the ground truffling for orange pills. ‘Look, babe, I just …’ ‘Shut up and keep looking for them. I’m not talking to you.’ For the third time in as many hours I was picking stuff up off the ground. CDs, pieces of paper, and now pills. You get days like that. Themed days. When all the pills were back in the dish and safely out of the reach of childish hands, she turned to me, bosom, I have to report, heaving with indignation. ‘Christ, Pup, what r’s it with you?’ ‘With me? With me? All I bloody did was pick up a pill …’ ‘Do you know what these are? Have you any idea what these are? No, of course you haven’t. They might contain anthrax or polio or God knows what. They might be absorbable through the skin. They might have been cyanide, for all you knew.’ ‘Well, what are they then?’ ‘What they are is a contraceptive.’ ‘Yeah?’ I looked at them, interested. ‘A male contraceptive.’ ‘A male pill. Coolness.’ ‘No, not a male pill, the male pill.’ ‘But not dangerous?’ ‘It depends, shit-wit, on what you mean by dangerous. They are untested on humans, for one thing.’ ‘Hey, well, I can be your guinea-pig then, can’t I?’ ‘No you can not be my fucking guinea-pig!’ she snarled. ‘Their effect is irreversible.’ ‘Come again? ‘Come again is exactly what you won’t be able to do, not in any fruitful sense at least. They sterilise permanently.’ I gulped. ‘Oh.’

43

‘Yes. Oh.’ ‘Narrow squeak then.’ ‘Not that your gene pool is one that a rational world would ever wish to see propagated.’ ‘You should keep them locked up.’ ‘I should keep you locked up. Let’s make a rule, Puppy. You don’t interfere with my work and I don’t interfere with yours. That way we can avoid catastrophe, all right?’ ‘Yeah, well,’ I said, moving away. ‘I’m sorry. Listen, I’ve got to like blow, ‘kay?’ She looked at me, a smile widening on her face. ‘Do you think there might be a chance that once your thesis has been read you’ll start talking proper English?’ ‘D’you mean?’ ‘All this “cool” and “slamming” and “woah” … what’s it all about? You’ll probably be a fellow of the college next year. Do you think Trevor Roper used to go around the place saying “woah, man … like, cool1.” I mean, darling, it’s so strange. So decidedly odd.’ ‘Well,’ I said, sitting down again. ‘Thing is, History, you know, there’s an image problem.’ This was a pet theory of mine that I’d never explained to her before. I smoothed the surface of the workbench with my palms, as if separating out two heaps of salt. ‘There’s two types of historian, yeah? Over here you’ve got A, your young fogey

-the Hayek, Peterhouse, Cowling, Spectator-rending, Thatcher-was-a-goddess, want-to-be-PPS-to-a- Tory-MP type, right? And then, on this side, there’s B, your seriously heavy Christopher Hill, Althusser, E P Thompson, post-structuralist, in-your-face, fuck-themdividual, up-the-arse-of-history type.’ ‘And which are you, Pup?’ Tm neither.’ ‘Neither. Mm. Then my scientific training leads me to propose that there must therefore be more than two types. There is type C ‘Yeah, yeah, yeah. Very clever. What I mean is, given this image thing, what do you do? See, the fogeyish type 44

belong stylistically to the forties and fifties, the heavy type to the sixties and seventies. So they’re both, like outdated, and History is no longer a happening vibe. My theory, right, is that a historian should belong to his own time more completely than anyone else. How can you historify a past age if you don’t identify completely with your own, yeah? You’ve got to come from your own time. So me, I belong to now.’ ‘I belong to now?’ said Jane. ‘I belong to now? I can’t believe you just said that. And historifyY ‘Yeah, well, obviously the jargon takes a bit of getting used to.’ ‘Mm. So what you’ve done is invent a third type, C, The History Surfer. Hanging Five on the pointbreak of the past, tubing it through the rollers of yesterday. Dr Keanu Young, PhDude.’ ‘Yeah. Sad, isn’t it?’ ‘Just a little, dear. Just a little. But so long as you know it, it isn’t too bad. There are plenty of fading hippies in the faculties and senior common rooms of the world so I suppose there’s no reason why there shouldn’t be fading surfies too.’ ‘Yo, way to go, bitch.’ We kissed again and I tripped out of the lab before I could get her in a bad mood with me again. On the way to the bike-shed I made a small diversion. Yep, there it was. Our little Clio. Not a mark on the bonnet to show for my calligraphic pains. Bloody scientists. What the hell was Freon anyway? I stooped down to do up my laces. All day they had been undone and - you know how it is with boat-shoes - the sides get so soft and floppy that the ends of the laces can get in and under the soles of your feet, giving you a permanent princess and the pea irritation. Hello! The laces of the right shoe were on the outside, neither end snaking under. Must have picked up a piece of gravel then, ’cause sure as shooting there was something nagging my sole.

45

Way-heyl One of Jane’s orange pills. Germaine’s Revenge. I ought to go back and … Sod it. I tucked the little tablet into my wallet. Maybe slip it into next door’s rabbit hutch. Snigger. Tightly laced now, I ride along the Madingley Road making lists in my mind. Food, wine, real coffee, laserpaper, back home, print out the Meisterwerk again, back into town to leave a clean copy with Fraser-Stuart and then, oh yeah, drop in on this Zuckermann guy, this Zuckermann dude … Making Free The eagle has landed ‘Push, woman! Push! Her fourth you say?’ Alois nodded and looked down with disgust. ‘Listen to me Klara … listen to me!’ Klara could not listen. ‘Klara!’ Alois leaned over her and spoke in his sternest voice. But she was miles from that place. Swooping from the hills, soaring over the lakes and the villages, perching on the church tops, clasping for a moment the bright gold onion domes in her claws before launching herself into the wind again, climbing ever higher and higher. The doctor came alongside Alois. ‘If she has laboured three times before there should not be this pain, even without such a copious dosage of laudanum.’ That remark did penetrate Klara’s opiate clouded mind. Pain? There is no pain, she laughed to herself. There is no pain, there is only ecstasy! Joy! Pure free flying joy. Another huge contraction sent her spinning higher even than the highest mountain. All Europe lay below her. Without customs posts, without borders or frontiers: all the animals running free. High up as she was, the movement of the smallest vole or butterfly was clear to her, she could hear the scrabble of earth as a rabbit left its burrow twelve miles beneath, focus on a single drop of dew trembling on one tiny blade of grass. Master of time and space, lord of all. She let out a high shrill cry of joy,

46

as she wheeled from east to west, from north to south, the lands racing beneath her vast wings in pure, unbounded freedom. ‘My God, Schenck, the blood! She never bled like this before! What’s wrong?’ ‘Nothing, sir. Nothing, I assure you. The head is large, a little tearing of the hymeneal muscle, no more.’ The beak of the eaglet pecking with fierce will at the walls of its egg. This one will live! I can feel her strength. The iron of her will. My daughter eagle, whom I will raise to set me free. ‘Klara! For heaven’s sake! Such noise! Are you sure you gave her enough?’ ‘It was a huge dose to begin with. Any more, sir, and she would be knocked out. Ah, here it comes. Yes, here it comes! One more push, Klara.’ She is free! She is in the world! Free! Listen to her lusty cries! The strength! The will! The lifewill, the lifelust. She will live strong and I will love her more than ever daughter was loved by any living thing. ‘Ha, ha!’ Alois laughing. He never laughed, but now he was laughing. He felt it too. Recognised the greatness of the moment. Doctor Schenck’s hand smoothed back the sweat-soaked locks, smearing a thumb-thick line of blood along her brow. ‘Congratulations, my dear. Your child. Healthy as an oak.’ ‘Liebling! Klara! Mein Schatz!’ ‘She is sleeping now, sir.’ ‘Sleeping?’ ‘Really, it was a huge dose. She was in a dream. She will awaken and feel refreshed. She will remember nothing of the pain. In that way Nature is kind.’ Alois leaned down to kiss her blooded forehead. ‘Look at him, you clever girl. Look at him! There he is! My boy! My wonderful boy!’ Making Conversation Coffee and chocolate

47

‘My boy! And so prompt on the hour! It’s just dripping through now, won’t be a moment. Come in, come in! Not so tidy as it should be, but you should find somewhere to sit. Perhaps there? Good. I shall be an Augmblick. You speak German? Of course you do. I get cups. For you, Michael Young, cups!’ I sit with my hands on my knees and inspect my surroundings while he moves about the gyp-room fixing coffee. ‘Well, not speak it exactly,’ I call through. ‘I can more or less read it. Got a friend who helps me with the … you know, the tricky idioms.’ I am not certain he can hear me over the rattle of cups. Good rooms he’s got for himself, I observe. Double bay out onto Hawthorn Tree Court, view of the river and the Sonnet Bridge beyond. Two walls lined .with bookcases. I stand to get a better look. Wow! Primo Levi, Ernst Klee, George Steiner, Baruch Fiedler, Lev Bronstein, Willi Dressen, Marthe Wencke, Volker Riess, Elie Wiesel, Gyorgy Konrad, Hannah Arendt, Daniel Jonah Goldhagen and on and on and on. Row upon row, every book I’ve ever heard of on the subject and dozens, scores, hundreds even, that I haven’t. If Zuckermann is a modern historian, how come I have never run into him before? A few shelves down, the books become more general. Here is one I know well, Snyder’s Roots of German Nationalism, Indiana University Press. I can almost quote its ISBN number, which I have, of course, included in the Meisterwerk’s bibliography, compiled only two nights before. I pluck it down, obeying that strange compulsion that leads one firstly to examine, in other people’s houses, the possessions one has in common. I remember seeing somewhere that advertisers for car companies had discovered that people are far more likely to read advertisements for cars they have just bought than for any other make. Same syndrome here I suppose. Or perhaps we feel it to be less a violation of

48

somebody’s privacy to peer at the duplicate of an object we own ourselves, than to poke our noses into something strange. Whatever. ‘ “Political nationalism has become for the European of our age,” ‘ quotes Zuckermann, coming through with a wobbling tray, ‘ “the most important thing in the world, more important than humanity, decency, kindness, piety; more important than life itself.” Is that right?’ ‘Word for word,’ I say, impressed. ‘And when did he say that, Norman Angell? Some time before World War I, I think. Prophetic’ ‘Here, let me.’ ‘It’s okay. I put it down here. Now! Milk? Sugar?’ ‘Milk, but no sugar, man,’ I quip. ‘Sugar man, Zucker Mann! Most amusing!’ He is laughing, it seems to me, more at the furious blushing that follows this dire effort, than at any brilliance in the joke itself. Why do I bother? ‘Ah,’ I see you have bound your luggage now. Very wise.

I look down at the bunjeed up old briefcase that I have set down on the floor beside me. ‘Yeah. Suppose I’ll have to treat myself to a new one eventually. I’ve had this old thing all the way from primary school.’ ‘Here. Now, excuse me for a second.’ He hands a cup of coffee to me and takes a mug of something else, hot chocolate I suppose, over to a lap-top at his desk. ‘I am enjoying,’ he says, blinking at the screen and sliding his finger over the trackpad, ‘a game with a colleague in America.’ I see over his shoulder that he has started to download some mail. I can make out a message only three or four letters long. He reads it with a giggle and moves to a table by the window where a chess game is set out on the window-seat. ‘Siss!’ he exclaims, moving a black knight, ‘I never thought of that. You play, Michael?’

49

‘No … er, no I don’t. I mean, I know the moves, but I wouldn’t give you much of a game I’m afraid.’ ‘Oh, I’m sure you would. I’m terrible at chess. Terrible. My friends mock me for it. Okay. It’s done.’ He comes and sits down again, opposite me. ‘So. How’s the coffee?’ I raise the cup to him. ‘It’s cool. Thanks.’ ‘Cool? Oh, yes. You mean it’s okay? Cool. It always makes me laugh this word. In and out of fashion like roller- skates over the past how many years. I remember when West Side Story was opening in New York. “Play it cool, Johnny, Johnny cool!” When was that? Let me see … yah, sure. 1957, nearly forty years away, my first year at Columbia. And still you people are saying Cool! But no more cool cats, hey? Now we have cool dudes.’ I squirm in my seat. ‘I don’t know really, Professor, I’m twenty-four and way past it.’ ‘Call me Leo. Oh certainly, way past it, sure. Twenty-four! Soon you will have to change your name from Young to Old. Yes, you turned twenty-four in April, I believe.’ I stare at him. ‘How did you know that?’ ‘I looked you up of course. Your home page on the Vor-r-rld Vide Vep!’ he accompanies his comically overenunciated accent with a magician’s flourish of the hands. ‘Michael Duncan Young, born Herford, April 1972.’ Everybody at every university has a world wide web page these days. Mine is feebly boring and written for me by Jane who understands all the computer stuff, the frames, the Hot Java, the applets, the VRML, all that. The page consists of a weedy biographical section, a photograph of the two of us by the river she had somehow scanned or digitised or whatever it is that you do and some links to the history faculty and to her own pages which are much whizzier than mine and include video of DNA twirling around and other seriously bonza gear. ‘And which exact day in April should it be, I wonder?’ Zuckermann continues. ‘Let me make a guess ‘I don’t see that

50

‘How about-… how about, say … the twentieth? The twentieth of April? How’s that?’ I wipe my palms against my thighs and nod. ‘How do you like that?! Bullseye! A twenty-nine-to-one shot and I get a bullseye first time! And the place of birth? I thought at first perhaps I was looking at a typing error, and that you were born in the town of Hertford in England. But, no, perhaps your father was a military man. Perhaps you were born in Herford, Germany, where there was until a few years ago a British Army camp?’ Again I nod. ‘So. You were born in Herford, Germany on the twentieth of April, 1972.’ He looks at me with a twinkle. For a horrible second he is the double of that absurd old man in braces who used to sing along with the Smurfs with his chin on the table, eyes moving left and right as they danced past him. ‘What about you?’ I ask, anxious to change the subject. ‘You aren’t a historian. What are you exactly?’ His eyes follow mine to the bookshelves. ‘Very dull, I’m afraid. Just a scientist. Physics is my subject, but I have as you see … other interests.’ ‘The Shoah?’ ‘Ah, you think perhaps to flatter me by using the Hebrew. Yes, most especially the Shoah.’ His eyes return to me. ‘Tell me Michael, are you a Jew?’ ‘Er, no. No I’m not, as it happens.’ ‘As it happens. You are sure?’ ‘Well, yes. I mean, not that it matters to me one way or the other, but I’m not a … I’m not Jewish.’ ‘Forster, you know, in the thirties he wrote an essay on what he called “Jew Consciousness”. How do we know, he said, that we are not Jews? Can we any of us name our eight great-grandparents and be sure they were all Aryan? And yet if only one of them was Jewish, then our lives are as absolutely contingent upon that Jew as they are upon the male line that has given us our surname and our identity. An interesting point, I thought. I doubt if even the

51

Prince of Wales could name his eight great-grandparents, no?’ ‘Well I certainly can’t name mine,’ I say. ‘Come to think, I can’t name my four grandparents exactly either. But as far as I know I’m not Jewish.’ ‘Not that it matters to you one way or the other.’ ‘No,’ I say, striving to keep a note of petulance out of my voice. There is for sure something very creepy about this whole deal, this whole line of questioning. Zuckermann is staring at me intently as if he is coming to some decision, although which way that decision is going I can’t tell. I had discovered over the course of my researches that there are plenty of really weird people in my field and some of them assume as a matter of course that you share their weirdnesses. There was a group in London who had somehow found out the subject of my thesis and sent me samples of their ‘literature’ that had me and Jane straight on the phone to the police. Zuckermann laughs at the expression on my face. ‘I can see that it irritates you to be jerked around like this.’ ‘Well, I just don’t see where …’ ‘Okay! No more jerking around, I promise. Straight to the point.’ He leans forward in his chair. ‘You, Michael Duncan Young, have written a thesis on a subject that interests me very much. Very much indeed. So. Two things. Alpha, I should like to read it. Beta, I should like to know why you wrote it. There. It is that simple.’ He leans back again to await my answer. I swallow hard. These are deep waters, Watson. Tread carefully. Tread very carefully. ‘The first thing you have to know,’ I say slowly and trying without success to meet the piercing blue of his gaze, ‘is that I am not a … you know, I’m not some kind of weirdo, some kind of … I’m not a David Irving type, if that’s what you think. I don’t collect Iron Crosses or swastikas or Lugers or SS uniforms or claim that only twenty thousand people died in the holocaust, any of that crap.’

52

He nods, with his eyes closed, like someone listening to music and waves for me to continue. ‘And you are right, my birthday does happen to fall on the twentieth of April. I suppose ever since I first knew that April twentieth was, you know, what you might call a red letter day, I’ve been … fascinated, or, I don’t know, guilty you might say.’ I take a gulp of coffee to wet a rapidly drying throat. ‘Guilty? That’s interesting. You believe in astrology perhaps?’ ‘No, no. It’s not that. I don’t know. As I say. You know.’ ‘Mm. Also of course, it is a subject that the biographies cover in very little detail, so it is very fitting for a doctoral thesis, where one needs to pitch one’s tent in virgin fields, yes?’ ‘There is that too, yup.’ He opens his eyes. ‘We haven’t said the Word, have we?’ ‘So sorry?’ ‘The Name. We have avoided the Name. As though it might be a curse.’ ‘Oh, you mean, er, Hitler? Well ‘Yes, I mean “er, Hitler”. Adolf Hitler. Hitler, Hitler, Hitler,’ he says, with increasing volume. ‘You scared of him? Hitler? Or maybe you think I don’t allow the name Hitler in my rooms, like it’s saying “cancer” in a lady’s boudoir?’ ‘No, I just …’ ‘Sure.’ We sink into a silence until I realise he is expecting me to say more. ‘Um … as for your being able to read it. My thesis, I mean. It’s with my supervisor at the moment, Dr Fraser-Stuart, and obviously he’s got to go through everything, check it all out, you know, before it gets sent off to Professor Bishop. And then I think it’s going to Bristol. Professor Ward. Emily Ward. I see you’ve got one of her books there … anyway, this lunchtime I had to print out a fresh copy for Dr Fraser-Stuart, after … you know, what happened in

53

the car-park and everything, but I could run off another for you if you like. Um. Obviously.’ ‘Well, I tell you the truth, Michael. You still got those pages I saw?’ ‘Yes, but they’re all out of order and in a bit of a state.’ ‘I am so eager to read your work that I’ll take all you got and put it together myself. I imagine there is page numbering?’ ‘Sure,’ I say, reaching for the briefcase, ‘help yourself He takes possession of the fat bundle of tyre-marked, torn, scrunched and grit-pocked papers and places them carefully on the table, gently smoothing out the top page as he speaks. ‘So Michael Young. Would you say that you knew more about the young Adolf Hitler than anyone else alive?’ I blink and try to consider this as honestly as I can. ‘I reckon that would be going a bit far,’ I manage at last. 1 got over to Austria last year and went through as many records as I could find, but I don’t think I came across anything that hadn’t been seen before. It’s a very narrow window of time that I’m interested in, you see. I think I can say I found out more about his mother’s background, Klara Polzl, than was known before, and some stuff about the house in Brunau where he was born, but that’s very early and had no real influence over his life. See, they moved to Gross-Schonau when he was only one, and then to Passau a couple of years after that, and when he was five they went from Fischlhalm to a village near Linz, and everything that can be known about his schooldays there is known, I would say. The historians in the late forties and in the fifties had the advantage of being able to talk to people who knew him as a boy. Obviously I only had old records to go on. So …’ ‘Still you avoid the name.’ ‘I do? Well, it’s not deliberate, I promise you,’ I say, definitely rattled by now. The foregoing has been a pretty long speech for me. ‘To answer your question, I

54

think I know as much about ADOLF HITLER’s childhood as anyone, and in some areas, yes, more.’ ‘Uh-huh.’ ‘Why?’ ‘I’m so sorry?’ ‘Why do you want to know exactly?’ ‘Well, I shall read your work first if I may,’ he moves towards the door, signalling the end of the visit, ‘and then maybe, you will do me the favour of coming to visit me again?’ ‘Sure. Absolutely. Okay.’ ‘Fine.’ ‘I mean,’ I look again at his bookshelves, ‘you’re obviously something of an expert yourself, so your opinion would be of great value.’ ‘Kind of you to say so, but I am not a professional,’ he says, granting me an equally unconvincing academic courtesy. I stand awkwardly by the door, not sure how to say goodbye. ‘Actually,’ I blurt out, ‘my girlfriend’s Jewish.’ Not pink this time, but scarlet. I can feel the full flush spreading through my back and chest, surging up my throat and then flooding the whole face until it is a great flashing beacon of misery and confusion. What a turd! Why did I say that? Why did I say that? He surprises me by putting an arm round me and patting me gently on the shoulder. ‘Thank you, Michael,’ he says. ‘She’s in biochemistry. This college. Perhaps you know her?’ ‘Perhaps. And she is still your girlfriend? After what you did to her car?’ ‘Oh. Well. She’s very forgiving. It amused her in fact.’ ‘It amused me, too. Such a chivalrous compliment, if the truth be told. So, you’ll come visit me again? And maybe next time you’d like to see my laboratory, hey?’ ‘Mm!’ I say, ‘that’d be fascinating.’





Unknown




55

He throws back his head and laughs. ‘Actually, my boy, I think, much to your surprise, that it would be fascinating.’ ‘Well, right. And thanks for the coffee … oh, I didn’t finish it.’ ‘No bothers. Whatever it was like before, it sure is cool now.’ Making Threats School report: I Klara, despite herself, touched Alois’ arm in urgent appeal. ‘You’ll be kind? You won’t be angry?’ ‘Let go of me, woman! Just send him in.’ She dipped her head sadly and left the room. As she closed the double-doors on Alois, she saw him take up his pipe. Klara bit her lip sadly: the pipe was reserved for stern, fatherly moments. Out in the hallway Anna was dusting a glass dome under which, their wings frozen in triumphant splay, two goldfinches peered brightly out. Klara nodded to her shyly and climbed the stairs, the tight, black, shining oak cackling like a hag beneath her feet. He was on the bed, lying on his stomach reading, hands pressed over ears. In spite of the creak of boards he had not heard her, so she watched for a while in love. He read at tremendous speed, turning the pages and talking to himself all the while, little laughs and gasps and snorts of disgust accompanying every paragraph. She supposed it was another history book. At the birthday party of a school friend recently he had impressed the Linz librarian by talking with detailed knowledge about the Roman Empire while the other children danced and tumbled over each other to piano music. ‘Gibbon is quite wrong,’ she had heard him say reprovingly, at which the librarian had laughed and patted him on the shoulder. He had writhed and glowered under this treatment and complained about it bitterly on the walk home. ‘Why must they treat me as a child?’

56

‘Well, darling, you are a child in his eyes. People believe that children should behave as children and grown-ups as grown-ups.’ ‘What nonsense! The truth is the truth whether spoken by a ten-year-old country boy or an ancient professor in Vienna. What possible difference can it make how old I am?’ He was quite right. After all, had not Our Lord as a child argued with the priests in the temple? And did He not say, Suffer the little children to come unto me? She did not tell him this, however. It would only encourage him to say something arrogant to antagonise Alois. As she watched him now, he suddenly stopped turning the pages and raised his head. ‘Mutti,’ he said matter of factly, without looking round. She laughed. ‘How did you know?’ He turned to face her. ‘Violets,’ he said. ‘You come to me on the air, you know.’ He winked at her and sat up on the bed. ‘Oh, Dolfi!’ she said with reproach, noticing a rip in his lederhosen and grazes on his knee. ‘You’ve been fighting.’ ‘It was nothing, Mutti. Besides, I won. An older, bigger boy too.’ ‘Well, you must clean yourself up. Your father wants to see you.’ She laid out one of Alois Junior’s cast-off suits for him while he washed in the bathroom. A little too big for him perhaps, but he looked very smart and serious in it. She picked up the book he had been reading and was surprised to see that it was the children’s story Treasure Island, all about pirates and parrots and rum. He came back from the bathroom, a towel round his waist. He frowned when he saw her holding the book. ‘I have to get changed now,’ he said, without moving. She sighed and withdrew. A year ago he would let her bath him, and now he could not even dress in her presence. His voice was breaking too and every day he became more secretive and private; that was the trouble with

57

boys, they grew away from you. She went slowly downstairs and into the kitchen. Anna was there, preparing little Paula’s tea. Klara decided to go outside and tend to the garden. There was, conveniently, a flower bed outside Alois’ study that needed weeding. ‘Come in, please!’ Alois was wearing his icily polite customs officer’s voice. Klara knelt below the open window, her hand around a tendril of convolvulus, and heard the study door open and close. A long silence followed. His childish trick of pretending to read, while poor Dolfi stood there, marooned on the carpet. ‘Are your shoes dirty?’ ‘No, sir.’ ‘Then why do you polish them against your trousers? Stand on both legs, boy! You aren’t a stork, are you?’ ‘No, sir. I am not a stork.’ ‘And you can take that impertinent tone out of your voice at once!’ Silence again, broken by a theatrical rustling of papers and the dry clearing of a throat as Alois began to read. ‘ “Some brain, but he lacks self-discipline … cantankerous, wilful, arrogant and bad-tempered. He has clear difficulty in fitting in at the school. He adopts enthusiasms with a zealous energy which evaporates the moment he realises that thought, application and study are required. He reacts, moreover, with ill-concealed hostility to any advice or reproof. A thoroughly unsatisfactory term’s work.” Well? What have you to say to that?’ ‘Doctor Humer. That’s Doctor Hiimer’s report, isn’t it? He hates me.’ ‘Never you mind whose report it is! Have you any idea how much the Realschule charges me for the dubious honour of teaching you? And this is how you repay me? “Nor can his influence on the other boys be said to be healthy. He seems to demand unqualified subservience from them, fancying himself in the role of leader.”

58

Leader? You couldn’t lead a kindergarten paperchase, boy!’ ‘What about Doctor Potsch? What does he say?’ ‘Potsch? He says you have talent and enthusiasm.’ ‘There!’ ‘But he also accuses you of indiscipline and laziness.’ ‘I don’t believe you! He wouldn’t say any such thing. Doctor Potsch understands me. You’ve made that up.’ ‘How dare you! Come here. Come herd’ Tears filled Klara’s eyes as she heard the whip swish through the air and smack flatly on the tight cloth of Alois Junior’s old suit. And Dolfi shouting, shouting, shouting, ‘I hate you, I hate you, I hate you!’ Why could he not learn to submit as she did? Did he not understand that the more he protested the more the Bastard liked it? . ‘Go to your room and stay there until you learn to apologise!’ ‘Very well,’ Dolfi’s cracked half-child half-man voice did not waver. Only the sound of liquid bubbling from his nose defiantly sniffed back betrayed his fury and his pain. ‘Then I shall stay up there until you are dead.’ ‘No, no, darling!’ Klara whispered, hugging herself in distress, terrified that Alois might raise up Pnina again. Instead she was surprised to hear him give a queer little laugh. ‘Your mother may spoil you and flatter your disgusting vanity, but believe me, Adolf, I shall break you yet. Oh yes. Now get out.’ ‘Don’t you … dare …’ she could hear a tremble in Dolfi’s voice as he fought back the tears, ‘don’t you dare touch her. I’ll kill you, I’ll kill you!’ Open sobbing now. Alois laughed again. ‘Oh run along, little boy, before your snot dribbles onto the carpet.’ Making Mistakes School report: II Sweat dripped off my nose and onto the floor. Stuff this for a plover, I thought to myself.

59

Doctor Angus Alexander Hugh Fraser-Stuart liked to gather his long white hair in a net. He favoured silk kimonos, white cotton happi-coats and ballooning trousers of black satin. His rooms, a spacious set of chambers occupying the corner of the Franklin building that overlooked the Cam, let in a great deal of light: direct sunlight dazzled through the windows, reflected light from the river rippled on the ceiling and white spotlight from modern tracks funnelled onto studiedly arranged pictures and prints on the plain white walls. All around the room, on sills, ledges, tables and copra matting, cactus plants were disposed in trim lines. A huge Arizona specimen, as from a Larsen cowboy cartoon, dominated one corner of the room, thrusting up two asymmetric arms like a deformed traffic policeman. Above the fireplace, a smeared Bacon portrait leered with dissipated glee at a pair of crossed Turkish cavalry sabres on the opposite wall. Over all, a huge heat sat like a throttling fog. The day outside was searingly hot, the sky a sinister, cloudless sci-fi blue and within the room convection radiators threw dry boiling air at the cacti. More sweat ran down from my armpits and into the gap between shorts and hips. I saw then, prickling with horror, that things were preparing to get very much worse. Fraser-Stuart, cross-legged on the floor, without looking up from the Meisterwerk spread on his lap, stretched out a hand towards his cigar box. When I had first sat in this room five years before, on just such a violently hot day and drowning in a thick ocean of Havana smoke, I had wondered if a window might be opened. The old man had looked sadly at his cactus collection and asked, blowing out a disappointed cloud, if I was wholly given over to my own comfort. A son of a bitch I had thought him then and a son of a bitch I thought him now. I watched the smoke transmute from soft, round blue billows into elongated, yellow ellipses like the tops of

60

cedar trees and settle high up near the ceiling as he continued to read. ‘Just need to remind myself,’ he had said when I came in. ‘Be sitting.’ So there I be: sitting. Also sweating, gasping, itching and pricking. Perhaps you know how a PhD thesis works. You deliver it to your supervisor and he passes it to an examiner who in turn sends it on to an assessor from outside your university. The two examiners agree that the work has reached the required standard and, at a simple but affecting investiture in the Senate House you are ordained Doctor by the Chancellor or his benevolent proxy. After a little toad-eating and bum-lapping in the right directions you become a fellow of your college, a lecturer within your faculty and a permanently tenured academic. Your thesis is published to acclaim; you let it be known to radio producers and television journalists around the English-speaking world that you are in the market for expert pronouncements when something touching your field arises in the news; a well-judged series of textbooks aimed at the lucrative schools market relieves you of any financial worries; you marry your best girl in the medieval splendour of your college chapel; your children turn out highly blonde, intelligent, amusing and more than averagely proficient at skiing; your old students go on to become Prime Minister and are good enough to remember their best beloved history don when handing out such Chairmanships of Commissions, Knighthoods and College headships as lie within the Royal Gift: in short, life is good. I was watching the first link of this chain being forged. Fraser-Stuart should have passed the Meisterwerk to Professor Bishop of Trinity Hall a week ago, but then Fraser-Stuart was as lazy as a cat. An ex-soldier possessed of a ‘brilliant mind’, whatever that means, he was one of those kooks who specialise in military history. Like Patton and Orde Wingate and many another self

61

regarding militarist before him he thought he cut a great figure mixing as he did a love of weapons and warfare with scraps of philosophy and louche arcana. Take a line through Sterling Hayden’s Colonel Jack Ripper and Marlon Brando’s Mr Kurtz. A blood and thunder general is bad enough, but one who prides himself on his knowledge of Taoism, French baroque music and the writings of Duns Scotus is your real menace to the world’s good order. If I’m to be sent into battle, give me Colonel Blimp any day, a fine, proud old bastard with a bristling moustache who reads John Buchan and thinks Kierkegaard is Sweden’s main airport, not some self-glorifying tit who plays polo in the nude and writes commentaries in silver Latin on the Pisan Cantos of Ezra Pound. At last, just as I was thinking he would never have done with it, he looked up and squirted a jet of smoke in my direction like an archer fish spearing its prey, a tight little fart ripping from his lips. ‘So then, young Young, have you sought help?’ ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘For your drug problem.’ ‘My what?’ ‘You’re all smacked up with joints of heroin, man! You can’t deceive me. High on Euphoria or some other fashionable narcotic. I know this to be a problem for all people your age. I think you should do something about it. And that right urgently.’ ‘Er … are you perhaps confusing me with someone else, sir?’ ‘Oh, I don’t think so. No indeed. What other explanation could there be?’ ‘For what?’ ‘For this, boy. For this!’ He waved the Meisterwerk with a snarl. My world began to disintegrate. ‘You mean … you don’t like it?’

62

‘Like it? Like it? It’s garbage. Offal. It’s not a thesis, it’s faeces! It’s pus, -moral slime, ordure.’ ‘But … but … I thought we agreed that I was working along the right lines?’ ‘So far as I knew you were working along the right lines. That was before you started snorting jazz salt or fixing yourself with skank or whatever it is you’ve been doing. It’s that film Trainspotting isn’t it? Don’t think I haven’t heard all about it. Christ, it makes me sick! Sick to the stomach. A whole benighted generation cut down before the scythe of dance drugs and recreational powders.’ ‘Look, can I assure you I don’t do drugs. Not even ?rass.

‘Then what? How? Hm?’ He had worked himself up into a huge hacking cough. I watched in alarm as, with streaming eyes, he repeatedly flapped a hand at me to indicate that he was recovering and that it was still his turn to speak. ‘We … we talk about your work,’ he resumed, in panting gasps, ‘and you give every sign of having all well in hand and then this … this effluent. It’s not an academic argument, it’s a novel and a perfectly disgusting one at that. What? What?’ ‘Are you sure you’ve been reading the right paper?’ I leaned forward, more in hope than expectation. No, no doubt that it was the Meisterwerk he clutched. ‘What do you take me for? Of course I’ve been reading the right paper! So, if you aren’t a doped-out crack fiend hallucinating on comic mushrooms then what is the problem? Oh … ha! … of course!’ His face brightened and he bared his yellow teeth to me in a gamesome grin. ‘It’s a joke, isn’t it? You have the real thesis tucked away somewhere else! This is a May Week prank of some kind. Skh! Honestly!’ ‘But I don’t understand what’s wrong with it!’ I almost wailed in despair. My last best hope had been that it was he who had been doing the joking.

63

He stared at me in disbelief for what must have been six full seconds. Six seconds. Count them. An achingly long time in such circumstances. Ow-alligator-fwo-alliga-torrf) 77£-alligator^foMf-alligator^/iw-alligator-5bc. I gaped back at him like a goldfish, trying to keep the tears of frustration from my eyes. ‘Oh Christ,’ he whispered. ‘He means it. He really means it.’ I stared back, thinking just the same thing. ‘I admit …’ I said, ‘I admit that parts of it are … unusual, but ‘Unusual?’ He took up a page and began to read. ‘ “A great soaring, all-powerful, all-seeing, all-conquering eagle with piercing eyes and mighty wings and talons that dripped with the blood of the pig-’” And you say you haven’t been injecting yourself with cannabis resin? “Another huge contraction sent her spinning higher even than the highest mountain. All Europe lay below her. Without customs posts, without borders or frontiers: all the animals running free.” Your research was so extensive that you actually acquired information as to the minutest details of the Polzl woman’s labour and the very images in her mind at the time? She kept a diary? She spoke her thoughts into a tape-recorder? And I note that you claim that her husband took the advanced twentieth century step of attending her lying-in? If so, fascinating! But where the attributions? Where the sources?’ ‘No, well, those are just linking passages. I agree they are unorthodox, but I thought they lent … you know … colour and drama.’ ‘Colour? Drama? In an academic thesis? Seek the shelter of a rehabilitation centre before it is too late, lad!’ He turned a few pages in wonderment, his eyebrows threatening to launch themselves clean into space. ‘Nor do you deign to tell the astounded reader how you came across the young Hitler’s school reports, I note.’ ‘I did take a few liberties, I admit. But Adolfs teacher Eduard Humer did say all that about Adolf being ill- disciplined and fancying himself as a leader.’

64

‘Oh, it’s Adolf now, is it? Very chummy, aren’t we?’ ‘Well, if you’re talking about a twelve-year-old boy, you can hardly keep referring to him by his surname, surely?’ ‘And Adolfs mummy pumping water from the well while the train goes chug chug chugging by “puffing imperial white moustaches”? Adolfs mummy clutching the tendril of a convolvulus? Adolfs mummy smelling of violets? What?’ ‘I just thought it made it all more readable, you know, for when it’s published …’ ‘Published? I swear to God I thought he was going to explode. ‘Published? Great fuck, child, even Mills and Boon would blush at the prospect.’ ‘I haven’t applied to them,’ I said, trying not to lose it. ‘Seligmanns Verlag have expressed an interest though.’ ‘For their psychopathology list possibly. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. This is simply insupportable.’ ‘Well, I could take those bits out,’ I said desperately. ‘I mean, they only amount to a twentieth of the whole. If that.’ ‘Take them out? Hm …’ He considered this for a while. ‘I mean how’s the rest of it?’ ‘The rest of it? Oh, competent I suppose. Dull but competent. It’s just that I simply can’t understand why you dropped in all that imponderable shite in the first place. Even if it were cut out I shouldn’t be able to read the whole in the same light. It is contaminated. You can fish a turd out of a water tank, but anyone who knows the turd was there won’t drink from it, will they, eh? Hm? What? Isn’t it? Hey? Hm?’ ‘But no one will know, will they?’ I suffered a frantic vision of Fraser-Stuart, in some excess of integrity and fanatical zeal, writing sorrowful letters to my two examiners warning them off the polluted Meisterwerk. ‘I just wonder if you are quite sure that you’re cut out for an academic career, you see. You don’t think you’d be happier in some other atmosphere? The Media, for example? Advertising? Newspapering? The Beee Beee O’

65

‘This is my atmosphere,’ I said, as firmly as I could. ‘I know it.’ ‘Very well, very well. Go back to your rooms then and type it all out again, this time omitting all fictitious and speculative impertinences. It may be something can be rescued from the wreckage. I find myself simply amazed that you thought I would ever consent to pass on such drivel to my colleagues.’ He burped suddenly and slapped his thigh, rocking backwards and forwards. ‘I mean, toss it, they would have thought I was barking mad, hey?’ I rose to leave. ‘Good heavens,’ I said eyeing him from bagged hair to rope-soled sandals, ‘we wouldn’t want that, would we?’ Free of the suffocating heat of his rooms, I leaned over the side of Sonnet Bridge, allowing such breeze as there was to fan out the damp heat trapped in the private corners of my body and the hot indignation swirling in the private corners of my mind. Below me punts were gliding up and down the river, loud with the bobbery of those lucky sons of bitches newly released from the examination halls. Christ, I thought. Heck and pants and great big vests. Life can be a bummer. ‘Coo-ee!’ On the bank nestled Jamie McDonell and Double Eddie, snug in Speedoes, reconciled and happy. I gave them a shy wave. ‘Go on, Puppy! Dive in, you know you want to.’ ‘I’ve, er, I’ve still got your CDs,’ I called down. ‘Shall I drop them off some time?’ They laughed, their arms around each other’s waists. ‘Oh do! Yes do. Drop them off. Please do! Do, do, do! Just drop ‘em!’ A voice startled me from close behind. ‘There is something so very melancholy about the happiness of youth, don’t you agree?’ Leo Zuckermann, an improbable Panama perched on his head, looked down at Jamie and Double Eddie wriggling on the riverbank. ‘If summer comes,’ he said, ‘can fall be far behind?’

66

‘It’s all right for them,’ I said with morose relish. ‘They’re second years. No finals, no prelims. Just May Week and wine.’ ‘And of course, it is so fashionable to be queer, as they like to call it now.’ ‘Well, I suppose so …’ ‘The pink triangle is a badge of pride. You know something, Michael? You know in the camps there was a purple triangle too.’ ‘Really? Who for?’ ‘Take a guess.’ ‘A purple triangle?’ ‘Purple.’ I pondered awhile. This was the sort of thing I was supposed to know. ‘That wasn’t the gypsies?’ ‘No.’ ‘Er … criminals then?’ ‘No.’ ‘Lesbians?’ ‘No.’ ‘Communists?’ ‘No, no.’ ‘Blimey. Let me see ‘Yes, a strange game, is it not? To put yourself into the mind of a Nazi. You have to imagine a whole new collection of humans to hate. Have another try.’ ‘Interior decorators?’ ‘No.’ ‘The mentally ill?’ ‘No.’ ‘Slavs?’ ‘No.’ ‘Poles?’ ‘No.’ ‘Er … Muslims?’ ‘No.’ ‘Cossacks?’ ‘No.’

67

‘Anarchists?’ ‘No.’ ‘Conscientious objectors?’ ‘No.’ ‘Deserters?’ ‘No.’ ‘Journalists?’ ‘No.’ ‘Christ, I give up.’ ‘You give up? You can think of no one?’ ‘Shoplifters? No, not criminals, you said. Um, a racial group?’ ‘The purple triangle? No, not a racial group.’ ‘Political?’ ‘Not political.’ What then?’ ‘Very well. I tell you for whom was the purple triangle. I tell you when you come and visit me in my laboratory. When will that be?’ ‘Oh. Well, I’ve got some more work to do on …’ ‘Perhaps you can come tomorrow morning? I should like it very much. We could talk too about your thesis.’ ‘You’ve read it then?’ ‘Certainly.’ I waited for some praise, but he added nothing more. We writers hate that. I mean, you know, this was my baby for God’s sake. Imagine you’re lying there in the labour ward and all your friends pile in to inspect the new-born child. ‘This is it, is it?’ ‘Yes,’ you gasp, flushed with maternal pride. Silence. I mean, come on … that just won’t do. I’m not saying you have to kneel in awe, proffering bowls of frankincense and jars of myrrh, but something, just a little ‘aaaaaah!’ … anything. ‘Right,’ I said at last, when it was clear that no gurgles of delight and admiration were ever going to be forthcoming, and blushing a little at the thought that he too found my

68

flights of imaginative fancy insupportable and embarrassing. ‘So I’ll come round to your labs tomorrow morning then?’ ‘Second floor, New Rutherford. One will direct you from there.’ ‘Freemasons!’ I said. ‘I’m so sorry?’ ‘Was it freemasons? The purple triangle.’ ‘Not freemasons. I tell you tomorrow. Goodbye.’ He left me draped over the bridge under the hot sun. Below me, Jamie and Double Eddie leaned forward from the bank, tugged on a fishing-line and hauled in a bottle of white wine from the water. Whatever happened to them, I thought, they would have days like this to look back upon. In dank provincial libraries in February as, balding and bitter, they fussed over their mugs of Earl Grey; in local news production offices, fighting for budgets; in classrooms, floundering in the chaos of contemptuous thugs; at the Crush Bar in Covent Garden, twittering over a diva’s tessitura - wherever they might wash up, always they would have a memory of being nineteen, with flat stomachs, dazzling hair and bottles of river-cooled Sancerre. This place, I reflected sadly, belonged much more to them than to me; yet I would stay here for ever. To them it would always be an island of time, an oasis in the desert of their years, while for me it would soon become a gossipy, oppressive workplace like any other. Oh, shut up, Michael. Oasis in the desert of their years. Fff! I don’t half think some crap sometimes. For all I know, if you’re going to suffer in life, it’s much better never to have known any kind of happiness at all. For all I know, the pain of suffering is far more bitter for someone whose childhood and youth has been nothing but trust and love and joy. I mean, if we’re talking deserts and oases, it would be a lot worse for a person brought up in Verdant Valley, Vermont to find themselves m the Sahara than it would be for a Tuareg who had never known

69

anything else. The thirsty man’s memories of endless unfinished glasses of iced tea in happier days are not a comfort are they? More a corroding torture. Probably better to have had a miserable, starved, abused childhood. Give you some real appreciation of things. Force you to taste every drop of happiness to the full when it comes. No, hang on, that can’t be right: trauma is the problem there. That’s what everyone goes on about these days. Suffering will traumatise you and close off your capacity to enjoy anything at all. Numb you, desensitise you, dissociate you. Whatever. Jamie and Double Eddie were enjoying themselves, carping the diem, gathering the rosebuds, intensely living the moment on the pulses, fully sensitised, fully associated. Good on them, whatever the future might hold. As for my future. Perhaps Fraser-Stuart was right, perhaps I wasn’t cut out for an academic career. I mean, arse it. I knew, deep inside me I knew that it had been madness to present him with all that horse shit. Hell, I knew that. Nonetheless, some demon inside me had allowed me to include those passages and present them to him. Perhaps I wanted to provoke him into failing me. Can you have a mid-life crisis at twenty-four? Or is it just the usual crisis of adulthood, something I was going to have to get used to until I doddered into oblivion? For the past year, I realised, I had been suffering from this pain, this leaking of hot lead in my stomach. Every morning when I awoke and stared at the ceiling and listened to Jane’s gentle snoring it flooded my gut, a dark swell of recognition that here was another pissing day to be got through as me. How can you tell if that’s freakish or usual? No one ever says. The ceaselessly expanding Christian Societies in the university would tell you that it was a sign that you needed room for Christ in your life. That your ache was a vacuum in the soul. Yeah, right. Sure. It was the same void that drugs filled, I supposed. I had thought too that maybe this was what Jane was for. No, not what Jane was for, what Love was for. Then

70

either I didn’t love Jane as I should or this was another blown theory. The longings of a creative spirit then? Maybe my soul craved expression in Art? But: can’t draw, can’t write, can’t sing, can’t play. Great. Where does that leave me? A kind of Salieri deal perhaps. Cursed with enough of divine fire to recognise it in others, but not enough to create anything myself. Aw, rats … So perhaps it was nothing more than the fear of the arrival of a transitional phase in my life. This is when the void yawns in front of you. When you stand at brinks, on thresholds. The void is the doorway you’ve always wanted to pass through, but as you near it, you can’t help looking back and wondering if you dare. Self-consciousness, that’s what it is. Always my abiding vice. I keep seeing myself. There I am. That’s me, walking along the street, what do other people see? That’s me, about to be Doctor Young. That’s me, with a girl on my arm. That’s me, wearing that cap - dork or dude? There I go, books under my arm, cutting the dash of the hip historian, academic cool on two bare legs, what a guy! So it’s a Prufrock syndrome. Do I dare to eat a peach? Are they laughing up their sleeves? Or not. Me thinking they’re laughing up their sleeves. Me watching myself watching others watch me. How do you lose that? What’s the trick? Blushing is the outward sign. Maybe I could train myself not to blush on the outside and the self-consciousness on the inside would go too. Naah … Things of and pertaining to a crisis, the dictionary says, are critical. So my life is at a critical stage. A pivot, we have. The hinge of the door to my future is my thesis. So deliberately but unconsciously I don’t oil the hinge, I let it groan loudly just in case I want to scamper back and choose another door. Now I have been told to go back and oil the hinge. The door will swing soundlessly open and everything will be fine and smooth. Is that what I want?

71

At length, Jamie and Double Eddie finish their wine, collect their things and get up to leave, waving goodbye and treading with overcareful mimsy steps back up the bank, like Edwardian children picking their way over sea-side rock-pools. A tear falls from the end of my chin and joins the river water on its journey to the ocean. Making Waves A window on the world Physics is way hip. If you see a couple of literature students in conversation these days, chances are they’ll be talking about Schrodinger’s Kitten or Chaos and Catastrophe. Twenty-five years ago the coolest cats on campus were E M Forster and F R Leavis; next came the Structuralists, Stephen Heath and his liggers and groupies on the Difference and Deconstruction tour; now American tourists hang around in Niels Bohr T-shirts in the hope of touching the tyres on Stephen Hawking’s wheelchair and having the secrets of the universe zapped into them. The Alpha and Omega of science is numbers. Mean to say, a man don’t get nowhere without them. The above two sentences, for instance, they don’t work with numbers. The Alpha and Omega of science are numbers, I’d have to say, and a man doesn’t get anywhere without them. The part of my brain that operates numbers is only slightly larger than the area that concerns itself with the politics of New Zealand or the outcome of the PGA Masters tournament. I have schoolboy French and I have schoolboy arithmetic. Just enough to get by in shops and restaurants. If I pay for a thirty pence newspaper with a one pound coin I am smart enough to expect seventy pence back. If I bet five pounds on a three-to-one Derby winner I will be pissed off not to finish fifteen quid richer. Price the horse at seven-to-two however, and sweat will begin to break out on my brow. Numbers suck. Dutifully, like most people of my generation, I have read, or tried to read, popularising histories of Relativity, Quantum Mechanics, Unified Field Theories, the T.O.E.

72

and all the rest of it. It is probably true to say that I have had gently explained to me in print and in person what an electron is more than twenty times, yet to this day I can’t quite remember whether it’s a minus thing or a plus thing. I’ve a feeling it’s a minus thing, because a proton sounds positive (though not as positive as a positron, whatever one of those little mothers may be) but what this negativity betokens I have less than no idea. All the little particles that make up an atom have to add up and bind together in some way, I’m pretty sure of that. But how a particle can have a minus quality or a negative charge beats the hell out of me. Maybe it only has a negative charge to balance the books of the atom. I have read books specifically designed, so far as I can tell, to enable non-scientist pseudo-intellectuals like myself to bullshit at dinner parties about particle accelerators, the Strong Force and charmed bosons, written in a clear manner with big diagrams, small words and the minimum of algebra, yet I have been utterly unable, after taking my head out of the pages, to retain a single useful fact, let alone an idea of the principles involved. Tell me once however, in a low voice on a noisy afternoon, that the Battle of Bannockburn was fought in the year 1314 and I will remember it to my dying day. I mean, what is going on here? 1314 is a number too, isn’t it? I remember reading once about the row that went on between Robert Hooke and Isaac Newton. Hooke thought that Newton had stolen from him the idea that bodies attract each other with a force that varies inversely as the square of their distance. Never forgave him for it. Now, I distinctly recall learning this phrase at school, thinking it would look good in an essay on the seventeenth century (historians like to nod at scientists in passing, Darwin, Newton, those guys, a few remarks about ‘mechanistic universes’ and ‘the upsetting of Victorian certainties’ are as safe in a history essay as that old standby ‘the newly emergent middle classes’. As everyone knows, there is no

73

period in history in which you can’t write successfully of a newly emergent, newly confident middle class, just as there is no period in history after the sixteenth century in which you can’t write about ‘the sweeping away of the old certainties’). So, I learn the Hooke-Newton sentence happily and write it down in my notes. As I write I look at each word. They are so simple. ‘Bodies attract each other …’ no problems there. Easy to remember, especially for a schoolboy who, let’s face it, is attracted by bodies every waking and sleeping moment of his life. We know that ‘bodies’ to a scientist usually mean ‘objects in space’. ‘Bodies attract each other with a force that varies …’ That’s more or less okay too, most things vary after all. So the moon is attracted by the sun, but maybe not as much, or maybe more, than it is attracted by the earth. I can handle that. ‘Bodies attract each other with a force that varies inversely …’ Hello. ‘Inversely’, eh? Problems ahead. Down periscope. Sound the klaxon. ‘A force that varies inversely as the square of their distance.’ Dive, dive, dive! I mean, okay, I know what a square is. Four is the square of two. Sixteen of four and so on. I just about mastered that. But inversely1? Come on, you have to admit that this is more than a bit of a bugper. What is the inverse of a force? If it comes to that, what is the inverse of a number? Is the inverse of a square the same as saying a square root? Is the inverse of the square of four, minus four? Or is it perhaps two? Or a quarter? Or minus sixteen? You see the problem. Well, not if you’re a scientist you don’t. All you see is that Michael Young is as thick as a plank. Bodies attract each other with a force that varies inversely as the square of their distance … I am fairly certain that I could look at that sentence from now until the crack of doom and never get any further with it. A good populariser, someone as thick as a Planck if you like, might be able to summon me up a good analogy along the lines of ‘when you throw a stone into a bucket of water the ripples spread outwards, yes?’ Or, ‘picture the

74

universe as a doughnut, well now …’ and while he was talking, if he was good with words and images, I might just get a handle on the principle he was describing. But it wouldn’t help me when I came upon a new phrase. ‘Bodies are sometimes attracted with a constant force defined as the reciprocal root of their mass’ or whatever. He would then have to begin the whole weary work again with a new model or a new analogy. It’s like grabbing a live salmon, the harder I try to get a grip on it, the further it slips from my grasp. Numbers suck. Only the anecdotal lingers with me. Einstein liked ice- creams, sail-boats and violins. A musician once said to him when they were playing a duet together, ‘For God’s sake, Albert, can’t you count?’ Einstein himself said things about God not playing dice with the universe. He said that he didn’t know what weapons World War III would be fought with, but that he knew exactly what weapons would be used in World War IV: sticks and stones. Heisenberg was attacked by an SS newspaper for being ‘a white Jew’ and ‘the spirit of Einstein’s spirit’ and was only saved on account of his mother knowing Hirnrnler’s mother. Under the dryer in Berlin one afternoon she said, ‘you tell your Heinrich to lay off my Werner,’ and Mrs Himmler said, ‘but Heinrich thinks the Uncertainty Principle is a Jewish lie.’ ‘Oh, that’s just Werner,’ said Mrs Heisenberg. ‘He doesn’t mean it. Just showing off as usual, trying to get attention.’ What else do I know about physics? Oh yes, Max Planck, the Father of Quantum Mechanics, was also the Father of Erwin Planck, who was one of those executed by the Gestapo in 1944 after the failed July bomb plot. Erwin, of course, was also Rommel’s Christian name, and Rommel perished after the bomb plot too. Schrodinger’s cat was Siamese. The word quark comes from Finnegans Wake. One of the Bohrs once said that if you weren’t shocked by quantum mechanics then you hadn’t understood it properly. When Crick and Watson built their model of DNA in the shape of

75

a pasta twist, they were helped by a woman whom many believe should have shared their Nobel Prize. Nobel, come to that, invented dynamite and Friedrich Flick, a Nazi supporter who made millions out of slave labour in World War II, owned the company Dynamit Nobel. Flick left a billion pounds to his playboy son in 1972, with neither an apology nor a cent for the survivors of his slave factories. Flick’s grandson tried to found a chair of ‘European Understanding’ at Oxford University, but withdrew it when moral philosophers there called his money ‘tainted’. See? Everything I know about physics comes down to history. No, let’s be honest. Everything I know about physics comes down to gossip. ‘Newton’s had the most terrible row with Leibniz.’ ‘No!’ ‘True as I’m standing here.’ ‘Says he stole his fluxational method.’ ‘Get out of here!’ ‘Mm. Says he can call it calculus or whatever he chooses, but it’s just the fluxational method dressed up in a fancy wig and Isaac thought of it first.’ ‘What is the fluxational method, exactly? Or calculus, come to that?’ ‘Who cares? The point is they’re simply not talking to each other.’ ‘Fancy!’ ‘I know … what’s more Wolfgang Pauli and Albert Einstein have had a spat too.’ ‘What about?’ ‘Something to do with neutrinos, I hear. Albert doesn’t believe in them. Wolfgang’s furious.’ ‘Neutrinos?’ ‘Some sort of antacid for indigestion, I believe. I expect now that he’s living in America, Albert prefers Rolaids.’ ‘Sakes!’ And so on …

76

Science, say scientists, is real history. The specific mixing, steaming and boiling on the stove of the cosmos that gave rise to planet Earth x billion years ago is real history; what happened in the hypothalamus and cortex of homo sapiens x million years ago to give us consciousness is real history. So the technopriests would have you believe. Bastards. Numbers suck. They don’t exist. There’s no such thing as Four. Even worse, there’s especially no such thing as Minus Four. I mean, no wonder the world fell apart after Gresham and Descartes. Allowing minus numbers to stalk the globe. A thousand years in which usury was rightly banned and then - Bam! - debit, credit, minus numbers and the positing of ‘minus one hundred tons of coffee’. Negative equity. From bonds to bondage, debt to debtor’s prison, savings to slavery. Numbers suck. This rush of bitter thoughts came about as a result of Jane and me hurling ourselves into another row. I had turned up at Newnham looking forward to a warm hug after the shock of the Fraser-Stuart debacle. ‘Well for goodness sake,’ said Jane. ‘What did you expect? You didn’t really mean to include all that sentimental puke did you? In an academic thesis?’ Hurt, I explained that I had looked on them as prose poems. ‘That’s right, Pup. Prose poems. I must try something similar in my next paper. “He bucked and writhed on top of her, his mind racing with the freedom of the act. Pure! Sterile! Free to love without consequence! Suddenly he was master of all time and space! It was as if…”‘ ‘I got some skinless chicken breasts from Sains-bury’s,’ I interrupted coldly. ‘I’ll go through and cube them.’ I sealed the flesh in hot olive oil in a marked manner while she opened a smug bottle of wine in a fashion more irritating than language could ever describe. In itself what we historians like to call a casus belli.

77

‘It’s easy for scientists. You just do the sums. Yes no, right wrong, black white.’ ‘Horse shit, dear.’ ‘You told me yourself. All the answers are sealed up in little packets all over the universe. All you have to do is open them. Here’s the gene that gives some people music, here’s one that makes you a saint. There’s a particle that tells you how heavy the universe is, there’s another one that explains how it all began.’ ‘Yes, that’s exactly what I said. It’s all so simple. If only we soulless nerds were as intelligent as you sensitive historians we would have had it all sorted out centuries ag°\ , ‘I’m not saying that!’ I banged the pan down angrily. ‘That’s not what I meant and you know it. You deliberately have to misunderstand me, don’t you?’ I’m going to watch television. Your wine’s on the table.’ As I mixed the Thai green curry paste and rinsed the rice, the arguments rose, tossed and seethed inside me. The arrogance, I said to myself, the arrogance of these people. I banged down wooden spoons and crashed the wok lid shut in time to each winning point that I played in my head. It’s as if scientists exert every effort of will they possess deliberately to find the least significant problems in the world and explain them. Art matters. Happiness matters. Love matters. Good matters. Evil matters. Slam the fridge door. They are the only things that matter and they are of course precisely the things that science goes out of its way to ignore. Another five minutes to soak up the water and stock, I suppose. You people treat art as if it’s a disease - fuck, that’s hot - or an evolutionary mechanism, pleasure as if it’s a - shit, I’ve broken it - we never hear you say, ‘ooh, we’ve discovered that those electrons are evil and these protons are good,’ do we? Everything’s morally neutral in your universe, yet a child of two can tell you nothing is morally neutral. Bastards. Suckmothers. Smug, smuggy, smuggery smugger s. ‘Ready!’

78

‘In a sec!’ I wrapped the warm bread in paper napkins and poured myself another glass. And the contempt, the breathtaking, arrogant contempt for those who wade about in the marshy bog of actual, mucky human motives and desires. Because our method is ‘unscientific’ - well of course our method is unscientific, darling. Real problems aren’t number-shaped, they’re people-shaped. ‘Mm-im! Smells good.’ ‘I know what you think,’ I say, assuming that all the time that she has been sat in front of the television, she too has been rehearsing arguments. ‘You think science can only be understood by scientists. Anyone who hasn’t been through the initiation ceremony is automatically disqualified from talking about it. Whereas any scientist can rabbit on about Napoleon or Shakespeare with as much authority as anyone else.’ ‘Haa! Hot!’ Jane gives herself time to think about this by going to the sink and pouring herself a cup of water. ‘All I’m saying is,’ I press home my advantage, ‘we live for seventy or eighty years on this planet. Which is more important, that we understand the physical principles behind the atomic bomb, or that we look at human motive so as to stop it from being used?’ ‘Why not have a crack at both?’ ‘Yes. Sure. Yeah. In an ideal world, absolutely. But let’s face it, you know. To understand something as complex as how a nuclear bomb works involves dedication to a particular discipline that takes time and commitment ‘I could explain it to you in less than four minutes. I should be fascinated to hear anyone explain to me the human motives behind war and destruction in so short a time. Pass the bottle over, will you?’ ‘Ah! Exactly. Exactly1.’ I stab the table with a finger. ‘The simplicity of science is like a religion. It seems to give you the answers, but ‘Pup, you just said that to understand something as complex as a nuclear bomb takes time and commitment.’

79

‘No I didn’t.’ ‘Oh well, I must be hearing things then. Sorry.’ ‘Look!’ I’m getting fevered now. ‘I’m not saying there’s anything wrong with science …’ ‘Phew!’ ‘… it’s just that it never looks at the things that really matter.’ ‘It looks at the things that really matter to science, though. I mean, that’s why we have different subjects surely?’ ‘Yeah, but other subjects aren’t blindly worshipped as if they have to contain the whole truth.’ ‘And science is?’ ‘You know it is!’ ‘Not by me it isn’t. And it doesn’t seem to be blindly worshipped by you either.’ She starts to mop up the curry with her nan. ‘But tell you what, Pup. There are thousands of scientists here in Cambridge. You introduce me to all those who blindly worship science because it contains the whole truth and I’ll have them drummed out of the university for insanity and incompetence. How’s that?’ ‘Well obviously you don’t admit it! You pretend to be all humble and doubting and awe-struck and “touching the face of God” and all that shit, but let’s face it, I mean come on!’ ‘Ah! Well put. Is there any more of this?’ ‘On the cooker. What I’m saying, what I’m saying is … science doesn’t know everything.’ ‘No. That’s certainly true. That doesn’t mean that it knows nothing, does it though? You going to have any more?’ ‘Thanks.’ ‘I mean, Puppy, the fact that science can’t explain why Mozart could do what he did, that doesn’t disqualify us from speculating on the composition of liver cells does it? Or does it?’ ‘It is absolutely impossible to talk to you. You know that, don’t you?’ ‘No, I didn’t. I’m very sorry. I don’t mean it to be.’

80

There you have Jane in a nutshell. There you have scientists in a nutshell. Wriggle, wriggle, wriggle. They suck. She was reading some South American novelist when I put my bedside light out. ‘Ner-night,’ she mumbled. I stared at the ceiling. ‘That man Hamilton,’ I said. ‘Remember him? In Dunblane. He walks into a primary school gymnasium with four handguns. In three minutes, fifteen five-year-olds and a teacher are dead. A human being points a gun at a child and watches the bullet explode in its skull. Picture the screams, the blood, the complete incomprehension in those children’s eyes. Yet he does it again and again and again. Aiming and pulling the trigger.’ I She put the book down. ‘What are you trying to say?’ ‘I don’t know. I don’t know. But isn’t that what we should be trying to understand?’ ‘I hope you aren’t bringing up that dreadful case as proof that your heart is bigger than mine, or your subject more important.’ ‘No, I don’t mean that. I don’t. Really I don’t.’ ‘Pup, you’re crying!’ ‘It’s nothing.’ Pumping along Queens’ Road the next morning I explained the whole deal to myself. Humiliation. It was that simple. Fraser-Stuart had hurt me more than I had been prepared to admit. It was all a big, angry blush. I had behaved like a spoilt child because I was scared at the prospect of my passage out of studenthood and into the land of grown-ups. That was cool. It was no more than a natural little tantrum. Like I said about doors, about hovering on thresholds. Saying farewell to the long, happy process of being a good, clever little boy who writes essays and earns praise and writes more essays and earns more praise. At seven I was smarter than most ten-year-olds, at fourteen smarter than a seventeen-yearold, at seventeen smarter than a twenty-year-old. Twenty- four now, I was no smarter than any other twenty-four

81

year-old around the place and anyway, it was no longer a race and there were no more prizes for being a prodigy. Everyone had caught up with me and I knew, I understood with a sharp gutstab of horror, that the danger now was that I would stand still while they raced past. One self-righteous, puritanical little outburst was permissible, surely, before I began the long uphill slog to discipline and diligence, integrity and industry, caution and care? I was allowed to kick and scream just once as I watched the dazzle and brilliance of youth cloud over. Like I say, I don’t half think some crap sometimes. Along the Madingley Road I skimmed, bent low over the handlebars. The Cavendish Laboratories loomed ahead, not a cathedral to the antichrist, just a building, an assembly of edge-of-town sheds. The people who laboured there had good hearts and bad hearts like anyone else. They didn’t regard themselves as holding the only key to human understanding. They just hunted their particles, their genes, their forces and their wave forms, like historians hunting for documents or twitchers scanning the skies for red kites. Jane must think I’m mad. On the verge of a breakdown. No, she understands, bless her buns. She knows exactly what’s what and she loves it. Mummy’s little handful. The original Cavendish laboratories, where Rutherford sharpened the axe that split his first atom, are in the centre of Cambridge, but the new building is out past Churchill College and towards the American Cemetery and Madingley. Is sunset still a golden sea From Haslingfield to Madingley? No, Rupert dear, it isn’t. More of a carbon monoxide fog, I’m afraid. Nor does the church clock stand at ten to three. As for there being honey still for tea, you’ll have to ask Jeffrey Archer, since he owns the Old Vicarage now. Perhaps someone should write a new Grantchester.

82

Say, stand the bollards yet in rows Mute guardians of the contraflows? Are there stabbings after dark And is it still a cunt to park? God bless our century. The main lab too, like an office- block: all glass, swing-doors and ‘Reception! May I help you at all?’ Privatised peak caps, sign-in books, laminated visitor badges, the whole vindaloo. If there is a word to describe our age, it must be Security, or to put it another way, Insecurity. From the neurotic insecurity of Freud, by way of the insecurities of the Kaiser, the Fiihrer, Eisenhower and Stalin, right up to the terrors of the citizens of the modern world - THEY ARE OUT THERE! The enemy. They will break into your car, burgle your house, molest your children, consign you to hellfire, murder you for drug money, force you to face Mecca, infect your blood, outlaw your sexual preferences, erode your pension, pollute your beaches, censor your thoughts, steal your ideas, poison your air, threaten your values, use foul language on your television, destroy your security. Keep them away! Lock them out! Hide them from sight! Bury them! Half my friends from school have -in sharp contradistinction to my own previously explained failure in this regard - successfully rechristened themselves Speeder, Bozzle, Volo, Turtle, Grip and Janga, pierced any spare folds of flesh they can and pinned them with gold, silver and brass and hit the road. They march down the high streets of southern towns in anti-pollution masks, hoisting skull and crossbone banners: they’ll fight against the car, the Criminal Justice Act, highways, the felling of trees, the raising of powerplants … anything. They want to be the ones locked out; they like to be thought of as dangerous; they enjoy their exile. And they think I’m a dick. I went to visit Janga last year, in Brighton, one of the places where she and her Traveller friends congregate, and I could tell, oh yes, I could tell, that these free souls





Unknown




83

thought me quite the little dick. Were I a real dick, mind, and a nasty dick at that, I would say to you at this point that they had no objection at all to me buying them drink after drink after drink in the pubs, that it posed no moral problem for them whatsoever to send me out to the mini-market at eight in the morning to buy their milk and bread and newspapers. I would say too that it is possible to be a waycool eco-warrior without smelling of dead bag- lady. I could add that anyone can be a hero on the dole. But that kind of argument is beneath me, so I say nothing. In the lobby, I stand now in a shaft of sunlight and bear with good grace the frownings of those who flap past me. So I’m not wearing a lab coat. So have me killed. Teh! These people … ‘Michael, Michael, Michael! So sorry to keep you waiting,’ Leo’s white coat is appropriately stained and a comical three sizes too small for his long arms. ‘Come, come come.’ Obedient puppy, I follow along the corridors, rising to my toes on the stride to catch glimpses of labs through the high glazing of the corridor walls. We come to a door. ‘NC 1.54 (D) Professor L Zuckermann.’ Leo swipes down a card: a green light glows, a small beep beeps, a lock clunks and the door swings open. I pause at the threshold and mutter unhappily, like Michael Hordern in Where Eagles Dare, ‘Security? That word has become a joke round here.’ Leo turns in alarm, so I whisper hammily into my lapel, ‘We’re in! Give us thirty seconds and then start the diversion.’ Leo twigs and I am rewarded with’ a prim giggle as the overhead strips spank themselves alight. I realise that my childish desire to say something frivolous arises from a watchful tension in Leo, a fear almost, that I find uncomfortable. It comes and goes with him, I decide. In his rooms it was there when he talked to me of my thesis, then it disappeared to be replaced by a joshing geniality. Finally the hunted look returned to his eyes when he ended the interview by inviting me here, to this place.

84

I am not sure what I expected. Something. I expected something. After all, why would a man want to give a tour of his laboratory if that laboratory were nothing more than an office? A shiny white-board without a single formula or string of upside-down Greek characters scrawled upon it. No oscilloscopes, no Van de Graaff generators, no long glass tubes pulsing with purple blooms of ionising plasma, no deep sinks stained with horrible compounds, no glass- walled containment areas with robotic arms for the transferral of small nuggets of highly radioactive materials from one canister to another, no poster of Einstein poking his tongue out, no warm computer voice to welcome us with an eccentrically programmed personality: ‘Good morning, Leo. Another shitty day, huh?’ Nothing, in short, that could not be found in the sales office of your local Toyota dealer. Less in fact, for your local Toyota dealer would at least have a desk-top calculator, a computer, a pot-plant, an electronic diary, a fax-machine, an executive stress-reliever and a year-planner. No, wait up. There is at least a computer here. A little lap-top, with a mouse trailing from the side. There are too, I concede, shelves of books and magazines and, in place of the year-planner, a periodic table. Leo marks my disappointment. ‘This is not a place for what we call the wet sciences, I am afraid.’ I go up to the periodic table and examine it intelligently, to show some interest. ‘That was left by my predecessor,’ Leo says. Well there you go. I look about me. The remark ‘So this is where it all goes on then’ while honoured by convention, would sound rather foolish, so I just nod vigorously as if I approve the smell and tone of the place. ‘If I need equipment there are other rooms where I may book time on the big machines.’ ‘Ah. Right. Really then, you’re more a theoretical physicist?’

85

‘Is there any other kind?’ But said sweetly, without impatience. He moves to his lap-top and opens it up. I see now that this is like no lap-top I’ve ever known and I can tell from the trembling of his long ringers that this is an important moment for him. The top section of the device is conventional enough, a rectangular screen. It is the keyboard which takes the eye. There runs a row of square buttons along the top, where function keys might be, but they have no attributes printed on them. Numbers, letters and ciphers are hand-scrawled in yellow Chinagraph under each key. The main body of the casing where the qwerty keys and trackball or pad should be is taken up with small black squares of glass which reflect back the strip-lighting on the ceiling above. Underneath the section of bench where this homemade box stands - I suppose it right to use the word bench, since this is, despite all appearances, a laboratory

-there is a cupboard. Leo opens the doors to this cupboard and at last I see some proper machinery. Two stately steel cabinets equipped with heavy power switches and, writhing all around, as bewildering a tagliatelli of cabling as one could hope for. I note for the first time that there are two wide multicoloured connecting ribbons, like old Centronix parallel printing cable, spewing from the back of the lap-top and down into this cupboard. Leo throws the power switch on each cabinet. There is a deep satisfying hum as cooling fans begin to play. The black panes of glass on the keyboard now reveal themselves to be LED displays, for a line of green eights lights up and flashes, as on a video recorder whose clock has not been set. Leo bends back his fingers to crack his knuckles as his hands hover above the keyboard. He darts a swift glance towards me and presses a sequence of his function keys, a little guiltily, like a shopper who cannot resist playing Chopsticks on a department store synthesiser. One by one, in a sweeping line, the flashing 86

eights compose themselves into stable digits and the screen flowers into life. What was I hoping to see? An animated model of the birth of the Universe perhaps. Revolving DNA. Fractal geometry. Secret UN files on the spread of a new and horrible disease. Scrolling numbers. Satellite spy pictures. Ten Hatcher naked. President Clinton’s personal e-mail files. The design for a new weapon of destruction. Tight close-up of a Cardassian warlord announcing the invasion of Earth. What did I see? I saw the screen filled with clouds. Not meteorological clouds, but coloured clouds, as of a gas. Yet not gaseous clouds. If I looked further into them they were perhaps more like air currents as seen from a thermal camera. Inside these rolling currents shifted areas of purer colour, edged with iridescent coronas which swirled and fizzed, cycling through the spectrum as they moved. Hypnotic. Beautiful too, quite radiantly beautiful. There were, however, screen-savers on most PCs which were no less easy on the eye. ‘What do you think, Michael?’ Leo is staring at the screen. The coloured masses are reflected on the lenses of his spectacles. On his face I see the haunted, hungry look that puzzled me before. Obsession. Not by Calvin Klein, but Obsession by Thomas Mann or Vladimir Nabokov. The pained need, anger and despair of a guilty old pervert burning young beauty with a stare. Or so I think at the time. By now I should be used to getting things wrong. ‘It’s beautiful,’ I breathe, as if afraid that my voice might burst the soft loveliness of colours. Yes, burst, for that is what they are like, these shapes, I now realise. They are like filmy bubbles of soap. The softly rotating membranes of oiled rainbow soothe the eye and float down deep into the soul. ‘Beautiful?’ Leo’s eyes never leave the screen. His right hand is on the mouse and the shapes move. As the scene shifts, the screen reminds me of the cinemas of my childhood. I would sit alone in the dark with twenty

87

minutes to wait before the Benson and Hedges and Bacardi commercials. To beguile the time the Odeon management offered music and a light-show of psychedelic pinks and greens and oranges writhing in liquid on the screen. I would watch with a sagging mouth into which Raisin Poppets would be dumbly pushed one by one as the colours changed and the bubbles of air suspended in the liquid worked their way across the screen like jerking amoebas. ‘Yes, beautiful,’ I repeat. ‘Don’t you think so?’ ‘What do you imagine you are looking at?’ ‘I’m not sure.’ My voice does not rise above its reverent whisper. ‘Gas of some kind?’ Now Leo looks at me for the first time. ‘Gas?’ He smiles a joyless smile. ‘Gas, he says!’ Shaking his head, he turns back to the screen. ‘What then?’ ‘And yet it might be gas,’ he says, more to himself than to me. ‘What a horrible joke. Yes, it might be gas.’ I notice that he is gnawing his lower lip with the insistent speed of a rodent. He has torn the skin and blood is seeping but he does not seem to notice. ‘I tell you what you are looking at, Michael. You won’t believe me, but I tell you all the same.’ ‘Yes?’ He jabs a finger at the screen and says, ‘Behold! Anus mundi! Das Arschloch der Welt!’ My puzzlement and shock amuse him and he nods his head vigorously. ‘You are looking,’ he says, pointing his chin to the screen, ‘at Auschwitz.’ I look from Leo to the screen and back again. ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘Auschwitz. You must have heard of it. A place in Poland. Very famous. The asshole of the world.’ ‘But what do you mean exactly? A photograph? Infra-red, thermal imaging, something like that?’ ‘Not thermal imaging. Temporal imaging one might call it. Yes, that would do.’

88

‘I’m still not with you.’ ‘You are looking,’ says Leo pointing at the screen, ‘at Auschwitz Concentration Camp on the 9th of October, 1942.’ I frown in puzzlement. So slow. I am so slow. ‘How do you mean?’ ‘I mean how I mean. This is Auschwitz on October 9th. Three o’clock in the afternoon. You are looking at that day.’ I stare again at the lovely billowing shapes in their sweet rippling colours. ‘You mean … a film? ‘Still you ask what I mean and still I mean what I mean and still you do not grasp what I mean. I mean that you are looking at both a place and a time.’ I stare at him. ‘If this laboratory had a window,’ says Leo, ‘and you looked out of it, you would see Cambridge on the 5th of June, 1996, yes?’ I nod. ‘When you look into this screen, it is the same, a window. All these shapes, these motions, they are the movements of men and women in Auschwitz, Poland, October 9th, 1942. You could call them energy signatures. Particular traces.’ ‘You mean … that is, are you saying that this machine is looking back in time?’ ‘One of these shapes,’ Leo continues as if I have not spoken, his eyes darting back and forth across the screen, ‘one of these colours,’ his hand nudges the mouse, ‘one of these. Any one of them, it could be any one of them.’ ‘What could be any one of them?’ He turns to me for a second. ‘Somewhere in here is my father.’ I watch as he works the mouse savagely in his search. It seems to behave like a TV , camera handle, allowing him to pan, tilt and zoom around his world of coloured forms.

89

He rolls the mouse hard to the left: the whole scene revolves clockwise. ‘My father arrived at Auschwitz on October 8th. That much I know. There! Do you think this is him?’ Leo stabs a ringer at a low shape whose feathery outer sheath oscillates with a delicate mauve. ‘Perhaps that is him. Maybe it is a dog, or a horse. Or just a tree. A corpse. Most likely a corpse.’  ¦ There are tears in Leo’s angry eyes, tears which run down his face to mingle with the blood that still oozes from his chewed lip. ‘I will never know,’ he says, bending below the desk to thump the power switches. ‘Never ever will I know.’ With a singing prickle of static the screen is emptied. The LED digits vanish. The quiet hum of the fan is stilled with a whoomp. I stare at the blank screen, silent. ‘There now, Michael Young,’ Leo absorbs a tear elegantly with the sharp edge of the shirt cuff that protrudes from his lab coat sleeve. ‘You have seen Auschwitz. Congratulations.’ ‘Are you serious?’ ‘Quite serious.’ Leo’s anger and intensity have disappeared and he is a calm Uncle Smurf once more. He closes up the machine and strokes the mouse with gentle affection. ‘We really were looking back in time?’ ‘Every time you look into the night sky you are looking back in time. It’s no big deal.’ ‘But you were focusing on a single day.’ ‘It is a different kind of telescope for sure. Unfortunately it is also quite useless. Just a light show, is all. An artificial quantum singularity of no more use than an electric pencil-sharpener. Less.’ ‘You can’t translate all those coloured swirls into recognisable forms?’ ‘I cannot.’ ‘But one day?’

90

‘When I’m dead and gone perhaps. Yes. It is possible. Anything is possible.’ ‘What else have you looked at? Any battles or earthquakes? You know, Hiroshima, anything like that?’ ‘I have watched Hiroshima. I have looked too at the Western Front in the Great War. Many times and places. Always, I’m afraid, I return to Auschwitz. The answer, by the way, is Jehovah’s Witnesses.’ ‘Er … you’ve lost me there. The answer to what is Jehovah’s Witnesses?’ ‘The purple triangle? You remember, you couldn’t guess who had to wear it? It was the Jehovah’s Witnesses.’ ‘Oh.’ I couldn’t really find much to say to that. ‘And you always return to Auschwitz, on that date?’ ‘Always that same day.’ ‘And you can’t do anything about it, you can’t … interact?’ ‘No. It is … how can I best describe? It is like a radio. You tune in, you listen, you cannot broadcast.’ ‘And you don’t know what you’re looking at? I mean you can’t interpret it?’ ‘The colours have a relation to elements. Oxygen is blue, hydrogen red, nitrogen green and so on. But that tells me nothing.’ ‘Who else have you shown this to?’ ‘What is this, Twenty Questions? You are the first person to see the device.’ ‘Why me?’ He looks at me. ‘A feeling,’ he says. Making War Adi and Rudi Dark enough at six in the morning, and with this fog, impenetrable. Yet Stower, the platoon commander, must choose such a moment for one of his speeches. ‘Men! The British front line runs between Gheluvelt and Becelaere with Ypres only five miles to the east. The Sixteenth has been given the task of smashing Tommy through the heart of his lines. We will not fail. Colonel von List relies upon us. Germany relies upon us.’

91

Private soldiers Westenkirchner and Schmidt peered through the gloom in the direction of Stower’s voice. ‘Germany hasn’t the faintest idea that we exist,’ Ignaz Westenkirchner said cheerfully. ‘Don’t talk like that,’ growled a voice between them. Ignaz looked in surprise at the yellow-faced private to his right. At five foot nine, Adi - they all called him Adi - was slightly above the average height, but his frailty, sallow complexion and the slender set of his shoulders made him seem slighter and smaller than the others. ‘Your pardon, sir.’ Ignaz bowed his head in mock Junker style. Forty-five minutes to go. Random fire had begun from the British lines, the fat, slapping noise sounding more comical than dangerous, like the farts of a grass- swollen bull. Ernst Schmidt silently offered cigarettes around. Adi looked down at the carton and said nothing, so Ignaz took two. ‘Not even now?’ he said, in amazement. ‘With action so close?’ Adi shook his head and cradled his rifle closer to him. Ignaz remembered watching him on their second day of training, how Adi had fondled that rifle in just that way the moment it had been issued. Gazed at it with wonder and delight, as a woman stares at new silk underwear from Paris. ‘Never smoked at all then?’ ‘Once,’ said Adi. ‘Occasionally. For social reasons.’ Ignaz met Ernst’s eyes and raised an eyebrow. It was hard to associate Adi with anything more social than the mess queue or the communal showers. Ernst, as usual, said and did nothing in reply to this offer of a shared joke. That’s all I need with me, thought Ignaz, one puritan and one humourless lump of wood. As if on cue, there came a low whistle from the west side of the trench and Gloder was upon them. Rudi Gloder at nineteen seemed fuller of life and richer in years than Adi

92

and Ernst who were already half-way through their twenties. Cheerful, handsome and blond, Rudi’s sparkling blue eyes and generous wit charmed and delighted all the men of the company. He had already been given the rank of Gefreiter and no one resented his promotion. Those who heard tell of him, his prowess with the rifle, his way of making up witty songs, his concern for others, often decided to dislike him. ‘Musical, athletic, intelligent, funny, brave, modest and impossibly good looking, you say? I hate him already.’ The moment they met him of course, they succumbed to his charm with joy like everyone else. ‘I move amongst you,’ said Rudi squatting opposite Adi, Ignaz and Ernst, ‘with figgy coffee. Ask not how this miracle was wrought, only enjoy.’ Ignaz took the proffered flask with delight. The rich sweet liquor slid down his throat and, free of alcohol as it might have been, it intoxicated his senses as though it had been cognac. He lowered the flask and met Rudi’s dancing eyes. ‘Nothing is too good for my men,’ said Rudi in perfect imitation of von List. ‘For you my dear sir?’ Gloder took the flask from Ignaz and held it towards Adi. For a second their eyes met. The deep kitten blue of Rudi’s, the pale flashing cobalt of Adi’s. ‘Thank you,’ said Adi. The ‘thank you’ that means no, Rudi shrugged and passed the coffee to Ernst. ‘Adi doesn’t drink, doesn’t smoke, doesn’t swear, doesn’t go with women,’ said Ignaz. ‘There’s a rumour going round that says he doesn’t shit.’ Rudi put a hand on Adi’s shoulder. ‘But I’ll bet he fights. You fight, don’t you, Adi, my friend?’ Adi’s eyes lit up at that word. Kamerad. He nodded vigorously and pulled at his big moustache. ‘Certainly I fight,’ he said. ‘Tommy will know I was here.’ Rudi kept his hand to Adi’s shoulder a moment longer before releasing it.

93

‘I must move along,’ he said. ‘I have to tell you

though, that a thought has struck me.’ He pointed to his head. ‘Our caps.’ ‘What about them?’ said Ernst, speaking for the first time that morning. ‘It doesn’t strike you?’ said Rudi with surprise. ‘Well then, perhaps it’s just me.’ After he had gone, they waited half an hour more. At seven, Stower blew on his whistle and the advance began. Too loud, too hurried, too chaotic to allow for fear or hesitation. A scramble of shouting and cursing and clambering and they were stumbling towards the British lines. The Tommy machine guns opened fire at once. Somehow, in the early moments, Ernst and Adi had managed to lose sight of Ignaz. They struggled on, the two of them, towards what they knew was the origin of gunfire, the heart of the British trenches. ‘Stower’s dead!’ someone shouted ahead of them. Suddenly, behind them, to the left and the right, new guns clattered and men either side fell, hit in the back. ‘Schmidt! Follow me,’ cried Adi. Ernst Schmidt was bewildered. Utterly bewildered. This was an attack, this was supposed to be an attack. An attack forwards. On the British. Was it a trap? Were they now surrounded? Or had they, in this fog, walked round a hundred and eighty degrees, so that now the British were behind them? Ernst fell down under a hedge beside Adi and the pair of them wedged themselves into its meagre cover panting fiercely. ‘What’s going on?’ said Ernst. ‘Quiet!’ said Adi. They lay there for what might have been, in Ernst’s confused mind, seconds, minutes or hours until, suddenly, compounding the unreality and taking the breath from him entirely, a man fell on them shouting. Ernst’s spectacles were squashed and cracked by the

94

weight of him on his face. He screamed into the man’s stomach at the pain of buttons and brass clips that ripped into the flesh of his nose and cheeks. I am to be smothered by a dying man, he thought. ‘Frau Schmidt, it is with sorrow that we report the loss of your son, suffocated by a corpse. He died as he had lived, in utter confusion.’ This then is war, the dead killing the dead. Ernst had time for all these thoughts. Time to giggle at the inanity of it all. Time to picture his mother and father reading the telegram in Munich. Time to envy his brother’s choice of the navy. Time to feel fury at headquarters for their failure to come to his rescue. Surely they must have known this would happen. The war will not be over by Christmas, Ernst would inform his senior officers gravely, if this kind of thing is allowed to happen. The next moment he was gulping for air, clawing at his collar and feeling for the ruins of his spectacles. The man above him was not dead. He was an officer from a Saxon Regiment and fully alive. He had rolled over and was covering Adi and Ernst aggressively with a Luger. He stared at them and then gasped in astonishment, lowering his pistol. ‘Christ!’ he said. ‘You’re German!’ ‘Sixteenth Bavarian Infantry Reserve, sir,’ said Adi. ‘List’s Regiment? Shit, I thought you were British!’ Adi’s response was to snatch the cap from his head and fling it from him. Then he grabbed Ernst’s cap and did the same. ‘Rudi was right,’ he said. ‘Rudi?’ said the officer. ‘A Gefreiter in our platoon, sir. It’s our caps. They’re almost exactly the same as Tommy’s.’ The officer stared for a second and then burst out laughing. ‘Fuck the devil! Welcome to the His Majesty’s Imperial Army, boys.’

95

Adi and Ernst gaped as the officer, a man of nearly forty years, a regular they supposed by his rough manner and language, beat his thighs and howled with laughter. Adi shook him by the shoulder. ‘Sir, sir! What is it? What is going on? Are we surrounded?’ ‘Oh you’re surrounded all right! Tommies ahead of you, Saxons to the left and Wiirttembergers to the right! Jesus, we saw you ahead of us and thought it was a British counterattack. We’ve been pounding you into hell for the past ten minutes.’ Adi and Ernst stared at each other in horror. Ernst saw the beginnings of tears form in Adi’s china eyes. ‘Listen,’ the officer had calmed down now. ‘I have to stay with my men. I’ll try and pass the word, but there’s no damned communication here. Will you both volunteer to go back down to headquarters? Someone’s got to stop this madness.’ ‘Of course we volunteer,’ said Adi. The officer watched them go. ‘Good luck,’ he called after them and then added, in a whisper, ‘put in a good word for me with Saint Peter.’ Making Music Hangover I sit in the passenger seat of the Clio while Jane drives us towards Magdalene for a garden party. The Siegfried Idyll is playing on Classic FM and I whistle the little oboe tune that leaps like an imp from the strings. ‘I’ve no idea,’ says Jane, ‘why Wagner didn’t think of that for himself. A toneless rhythmless howl is exactly what the piece needs there.’ ‘Sorry.’ I desist and win a forgiving beam. ‘It’s okay Pup,’ she says, giving my thigh a couple of hearty slaps. ‘You do your best.’ ‘It’s funny,’ I venture at length, ‘that you like Wagner.’ ‘Mm?’ ‘I mean, you know. Being Jewish.’ ‘It is?’ ‘Hitler’s favourite composer and all.’

96

‘Hardly Wagner’s fault. Hitler liked dogs too. And I expect he simply adored cream cakes.’ ‘Dogs and cream cakes,’ I return, quick as a flash, ‘aren’t anti-Semitic’ ‘But Wagner was?’ ‘You know he was. Everyone knows.’ ‘But I don’t think, Puppy, that he would have stood by the ovens cheering the murderers on, do you? He wrote about love and power. You can’t have both. Love is stronger, love is better. He said so many times.’ ‘Hm. Still.’ ‘Still,’ she agrees. ‘And I have to admit my father hated me playing The Ring at full volume in my bedroom. Drove him crazy.’ It never precisely irritates me that Jane’s tastes in art are just a little more serious than mine, but it always surprises me. If it comes to a choice of films she always prefers the art house to the obvious. I can watch any movie at any time of the day and get something out of it even if I think it’s bollocks, but I never really believed it when Jane said she genuinely didn’t enjoy Toy Story, nor could I begin to understand it when she didn’t throw up at The Piano. Schindler’s List she declined to see, which was fair enough. ‘Did you lose,’ I ask, my throat a little tight, for this is something I have never asked before, ‘many of your family in the camps?’ She shoots a surprised glance. ‘Several. Most of my grandparents’ brothers and sisters. My great-aunts and great-uncles, I suppose. And cousins, that sort of thing.’ ‘Where? I mean, which camp? Do you know?’ ‘No,’ she sounds surprised at her answer as she gives it. ‘No, I don’t know. My mother’s family was from the Ukraine I think. My father’s from Poland. So around there I suppose.’ ‘You’ve never asked your parents?’

97

‘You don’t. You tend not to. Anyway, it’s more a question of them asking their parents. My father was born two years after the war ended.’ ‘Sure.’ ‘I think my grandfather wrote something. A memoir, a diary, something like that. Why?’ ‘Oh, you know. Just wondered. It’s not something I’ve ever heard you talk about.’ ‘What’s to say?’ ‘Right.’ A companionable little pause. The Siegfried Idyll draws itself out to an attenuated close and I switch to One FM where Oasis are having a seriously good time, telling the world not to look back in anger. ‘Suppose,’ I say, catching her wince and turning the volume down a smidge, ’suppose you could go back in time to … I don’t know, Dachau, say, Treblinka, Auschwitz, whatever. What would you do?’ ‘What would I do? Be gassed I should imagine. I don’t suppose I would be offered much choice in the matter.’ ‘Right.’ Another little pause. Not so companionable, but friendly enough. ‘Do you think,’ I ask, ‘that we will ever be able to go back in time?’ ‘No.’ ‘Is it scientifically impossible?’ ‘Just logically.’ ‘What do you mean?’ ‘Well,’ says Jane, backing the car into a scientifically and logically impossible space, ‘if it were possible, then at some time in the future someone would have gone back and stopped things like the holocaust from happening, wouldn’t they? And they would have prevented that madman from walking into the Dunblane school gym with guns blazing. And they would have warned the office workers in that federal building in Oklahoma that there

98

was a bomb there. They would have told Archduke Ferdinand to cancel his visit to Sarajevo, advised Kennedy to travel in a closed car, suggested to Martin Luther King that he stayed home that day. Don’t you think? Above all,’ she says switching off the radio with a crisp snap, ‘above all, they would have gone back to Manchester in the seventies, separated the Gallagher brothers at birth and made sure that Oasis was never formed.’ Tchish! Some people … Double Eddie and James are at the party, all in white with laurel wreaths on their heads. The dudes throwing this particular party are those kind of dudes and it is that kind of party. ‘It’s Puppies!’ ‘Er … hi, you two. You know Jane Greenwood?’ They each take her hand solemnly. ‘Hello, Jane Greenwood. I am Edward Edwards.’ ‘And I, I am James McDonell. So there.’ ‘Are you Puppy’s girlfriend? Jane nods gravely. Double Eddie puts an arm round her shoulder. ‘Tell me, is he marvellous in bed?’ ‘I’ve still got those CDs of yours,’ I say. ‘Must give them back to you some time.’ ‘He is, isn’t he? He is! Isn’t he? I bet he is. Tell me he is.’ I duck away, pinker than pink, to a large central punch fountain and fill a glass. We leave after a few drinks. Parties are for the young. Back at the house in Onion Row, Jane holds me over the toilet and watches, detached and only slightly amused, as I noisily turn my intestines inside out. ‘I reckon,’ I say, trying to pull free a string of spittle which hangs down and bounces over the bowl like a yoyo, ‘that I may need a pair of scissors to get rid of this. It seems to be like, glued to the back of my throat.’

99

‘If you keep making that horrible hawking noise to clear it I’m going to leave the country and never come back,’ says Jane. ‘You won’t even get a postcard.’ ‘It’s not normal gob, this. It’s a kind of elastic. You know, like a bungee. Khkhkhya!’ The cappuccino-maker impression seems to do the trick. A wadge of sputum flies free from my uvula and the long string slaps itself around the porcelain. ‘Funny,’ I say, as I stagger to my feet, ‘I don’t remember eating any plum skins.’ ‘You,’ says Jane, ‘are a horrid little boy. You came in here as white as a sheet and now you are as purple as ‘A purple sheet.’ ‘Your hair is damp and stuck to your forehead, your nose and eyes are running, you smell revolting, sweat is oozing from the bum-fluff on your upper-lip …’ ‘Stubble,’ I amend with a sniff that sends vomitory acid deep into my sinuses. ‘Bum-fluff ‘Anyway,’ I say, eyes stinging. ‘There was something wrong with that punch.’ ‘Of course there was. It was ninety per cent vodka. As it is every year. And every year you make a fool of yourself with it. Every year I have to virtually carry you to the bathroom and watch you puke.’ ‘It’s a tradition then. That’s cute.’ ‘And I don’t know why you’re walking towards the bedroom.’ ‘Actually I think I’ll crash out now.’ ‘You’ll have a shower first.’ ‘Oh, right. That’s prolly a good idea. Shower. Cool. Yeah. Sound.’ I narrow my eyes with a glitter. ‘That might wake me up and then maybe we could …’ I give two clicks in the back of my mouth, like a rider urging on a horse, and I wink suggestively. ‘Christ,’ says Jane. ‘Are you suggesting sex?’ ‘You betcher, bitch.’ ‘I’d rather clean out that lavatory with my tongue.’

100

I awoke with a quiver to find myself in bed, Jane snoring lightly beside me. Not an unattractive snore I should point out. A gentle, elegant snore. I listened and watched for a while before noticing the alarm clock beside her. Ten minutes past four. Hm. We had returned from the party early, no later than half past eight. What happened after that? I had thrown up. Natch. Then what? I guessed I must have showered and crashed. No wonder I was awake. I had slept nearly eight hours. I became aware that my tongue was stuck to the roof of my mouth and that a great thirst was upon me. So maybe that was why my body woke me up. I slid off the bed and padded nude to the kitchen, the bones in my feet cracking on the floor. The window above the kitchen sink looked out over fields, but the sky was already light, so I modestly pulled down the blind before leaning forward to hook myself over and pee into the plughole. A deliciously naughty feeling, which I justified to myself by reflecting that this quiet piddle was less likely to wake Jane up than a great plunging wazz into the bathroom toilet. Besides, W H Auden always pissed in sinks. Often when there were piles of crockery in them too. I ran the tap until the water was icy cold and I ducked under the mixer to drink. I gulped and gulped and gulped. Never had water tasted sweeter. Don’t need an aspirin. No headache, that’s the joy of voddie. More than no headache, though. I felt wonderful. As great as Frosties. I simply rippled with well-being. I stood panting, the water dripping from my chin and down my bare chest. It was ages since I had felt so alone. When the world around you is asleep, that is when you are truly alone. You have to rise early of course. Many times, when

101

working on the thesis, I had stayed up as late as just this hour and felt miserable and lonely, but waking up as early as this, that is when you feel gloriously, positively alone, there’s the difference. Much better. Mm. I stalked to the bread bin, enjoying the slap of my feet on the tiles. Not too warm, not too chilly. Too exactly just right. I tore off a hunk of bread and inspected the fridge. I don’t know why I find it intensely erotic to stand naked before an open fridge, but I do. Maybe it’s something to do with the expectation of a hunger soon to be satisfied, maybe it’s that the spill of light on my body makes me feel like a professional stripper. Maybe something weird happened to me when I was young. It is an alarming feeling, mind, because all those assembled foodstuffs put ideas in your head when you’re on the rise. Stories of what you can do with unsalted butter or ripe melons or raw liver, they crowd your head as the blood begins to rush. I spotted a big slab of Red Leicester and pulled off a piece with my hands. I stood there chewing for some time, buzzing with happiness. That was when the idea came to me, full born. The force of it made me gape. A mashed pellet of bread fell from my open mouth and at once the blood flew upwards to the brain where it was needed, leaving my twitching excitement below with nothing to do but shrink back like a startled snail. I closed the fridge with my shoulder and turned with a giggle. My head was pounding as I tiptoed to the study. All my notes were piled onto a shelf above the computer. I knew what I was looking for and I knew I could find it. I mention the state of sexual arousal that preceded the birth of my idea because I have a theory, looking back, that a subconscious part of my mind, pondering the thought of some kind of sexual release, with or without the use of unsalted butter, olive oil or liver, had wandered to thoughts of semen. Thoughts of semen had awoken an affinity (something to do with reflecting on the

102

absence of a headache while drinking from the tap perhaps), a connection in my memory which then caused synapses to fire off in all directions until the idea screamed itself awake in my consciousness. It’s only a theory. You can be the judge of it. Making Movies TIM. FADE IN: EXT. ST MATTHEW’S COLLEGE - MORNING A GARDENER is mowing the court of the lawn in Hawthorn Tree Court. A bell chimes the hour. CUT TO: INT. ST MATTHEW’S COLLEGE, OUTSIDE LEO’S ROOMS - MORNING MICHAEL stands outside the Professor’s door, thumping on the oak eagerly. He is carrying two large Safeways carrier bags. LEO (O/V) Come in! MICHAEL laboriously puts down the bags, pushes wide the door, picks the bags up again and enters, hooking the door closed behind him with his foot. LEO looks up from his computer in surprise. LEO Michael! MICHAEL (nervously) Professor, I have to talk to you. LEO Sure, sure. Come in, come in. INT. ST MATTHEW’S COLLEGE, LEO’S ROOMS -MORNING MICHAEL is blushing, nervous and out of breath. He moves to the centre of the room but seems unable to know what to say. LEO stares hard at him. LEO (continuing) Sit down, I get you a cup of coffee. LEO disappears into the gyp-room. HOLD on MICHAEL. We hear, as before, coffee cups rattling and a kettle being filled, OFF. MICHAEL walks over to the bookshelves and looks at them once more. He is restless. He taps his teeth nervously with his fingernails. He is coming to a decision.

103

MICHAEL (raising his voice) Professor . . . LEO (coming out) How many times do I have to tell the boy? My name is Leo. MICHAEL Leo, like I’m no scientist, you know, but isn’t it true to say that when Marconi invented the wireless the first thing he did was make a broadcast? LEO What do you mean? MICHAEL Well, he couldn’t on.ly receive, could he? I mean, there weren’t any signals to receive, were there? So he had to transmit and receive. LEO nods his head slowly. LEO That makes sense. MICHAEL Cool. So what I’m saying is, the discovery of … what do you call it … wireless telegraphy? LEO Wireless telegraphy, sure. MICHAEL The discovery of wireless telegraphy meant the ability to receive and to broadcast. Otherwise it would have been pointless, yeah? LEO Quite pointless . MICHAEL And you said that your machine . . . what you showed me yesterday . . . (breaking off as a thought strikes) . . . what’s it called, by the way? LEO Called? What do you mean? MICHAEL Its name. What’s its name? LEO (puzzled) Name? It doesn’t have a name. MICHAEL Oh. Maybe we should call it (thinking) . . . we should call it Tim. LEO

104

Tim? MICHAEL Yeah, as in ‘time’ . Or . . . hang on! Yeah, it could stand for . . . er, what was it you said? ‘Temporal imaging . . . ‘ So, Tim stands for Temporal Imaging Machine . Cool! Tim,. Tim. Like it. LEO Tim. Okay, we call it Tim. MICHAEL What was I saying? LEO (with a shrug) Something loosely connected with Marconi . MICHAEL Right, right. You told me that Tim was like a radio set that could only tune in, but couldn’t transmit. LEO That’s what I said. MICHAEL Well, what I’m saying is, any half-way competent engineer could take an ordinary radio, muck about with it a bit and

turn it into a transceiver, right? LEO An ordinary radio, yes. But who’s talking about an ordinary radio? The kettle starts to WHISTLE angrily in the background. MICHAEL It’s the same thing! The same principle. (beat) You can do it, can’t you? You know how to! LEO meets MICHAEL’S eager stare. LEO I get the coffee. MICHAEL (calling after him) You can! You can do it! MICHAEL follows LEO into the gyp-room. LEO is pouring boiling water into a cafetiere. MICHAEL watches in a state of suppressed excitement. MICHAEL (continuing) It’s true, isn’t it? It is. LEO holds up a finger for silence and with calm deliberation assembles, on a tray, a

105

jug of milk, a little bowl of sugar and a mug for his own hot chocolate. He picks up the tray and goes out: MICHAEL follows close at heel, still bubbling with excitement. LEO puts down the tray, watching MICHAEL’S energetic pacing out of the corner of his eye. LEO Now I know why they call you Puppy. You follow people about, you pant, you yelp. For all I know you piddle on the floor as well. MICHAEL I just want to know . . . LEO (interrupting) Listen. Sit down and listen. MICHAEL drops sulkily into a chair. LEO (continuing) While I pour your coffee, you listen. You know nothing about the device I have constructed, this Tim. You know nothing about the physics behind it, nor the” technology behind it. I described it as being like a radio set because I thought that was something … a model, an analogy . . . that you could understand. (handing him a cup of coffee) But that does not mean that this device, that Tim really works like a radio set. Such an analogy falls down in all kinds of ways. MICHAEL (defiant) But you can, can’t you? You can! LEO picks up his chocolate and leans back. He closes his eyes. LEO Yes. In theory it is possible. MICHAEL (triumphant) I knew it! What did I say? We can go back! In time. LEO Not go back. I can, as you put it, transmit. At least I believe I can. It is possible. In principle it is possible. MICHAEL So we erase him! If we wanted to, we could liquidate Hitler.

106

LEO (violently) No! Absolutely not! But . . . MICHAEL LEO You think the thought hasn’t crossed my mind? You think the idea of being able to rid humanity of the curse of Adolf Hitler isn’t something I think of every minute of my waking life? But listen to me, Michael, listen to me. The day I was first told what happened to my father, what happened there in Auschwitz, that day I made myself a promise. I swore before God and the Universe that never, ever, would I involve myself in war, in murder, in the harming of another human being. You understand me? Respect. MICHAEL LEO So don’t talk to me of killing. MICHAEL That’s cool. I read you. But if that’s all true then tell me this. Why were you so wild to read my thesis? And why did you invite me to your lab and show Tim off to me? When I asked you yesterday, when I said, ‘Why me?’ you remember how you replied? lA feeling, ‘ you said. Remember that? A feeling. What did you mean ‘a feeling’? LEO I’m not sure. I - I don’t know. MICHAEL Yes you do, Leo. You thought I could help you, and I can. 1 can help you wipe the memory of Hitler from the face of the earth. LEO is agonised. LEO I told you, Michael! I said to you. I cannot kill. I have sworn. But MICHAEL is ready for this. He replies with a pleased smile. MICHAEL Who said’anything about killing?

107

LEO stares at him. MICHAEL beams triumphantly and takes out his wallet. He scrabbles around inside and holds up, between forefinger and thumb, a SMALL ORANGE PILL. CLOSE on the orange pill. MICHAEL (continuing: smiling wickedly) We.just make sure the motherfucker is never born. Know what I’m saying? CUT TO: EXT. ST MATTHEW’S COLLEGE - DAY CRANE up to the window of LEO’s rooms. At the same time we see the outline of LEO, drawing the curtains shut. MUSIC: SAINT-SAENS ORGAN CONCERTO. CUT TO: A MONTAGE of shots in various locations at different times of day. INT . LEO’ S ROOMS - DAY LEO and MICHAEL pore over an old street map of the town of Brunau-am-Inn in Upper Austria. MICHAEL is pointing to a particular street. LEO nods and makes notes. CUT TO : EXT. NEW CAVENDISH LABORATORIES -AFTERNOON High establishing shot, moving from the Royal Observatory over the road to the huge tanker of Liquid Nitrogen, the forest of satellite dishes and the Physics Laboratory. CUT TO: INT. LEO’S LAB - AFTERNOON MICHAEL is sucking from a litre bottle of Coke. He is perched on a stool and watching LEO as LEO tests part of ‘TIM’ , LEO’s device. TIM has its casing stripped off, and various probes attached to the circuitry inside. CUT TO: INT . MICHAEL’S NEWNHAM HOUSE - MORNING JANE wakes up and sees MICHAEL sprawled, fully dressed on the bed beside her. She gives him a nudge. He rolls over and, with his back to her, continues to sleep.

108

JANE frowns: puzzled. CUT TO: INT. ST MATTHEW’S COLLEGE, PORTER’S LODGE MORNING MICHAEL, yawning, is inspecting his pigeon-hole. He pulls out a small yellow parcel. He turns it over in his hand and sees that it bears an Austrian postmark. He rips it open excitedly. We see that it is a bundle of schematics, facsimiles of blueprints or plans of some kind. MICHAEL is very excited. MICHAEL walks out of the porter’s lodge, his head buried in what he is reading. He barges straight into DOCTOR FRASER-STUART, who is wearing a fetching kimono. MICHAEL apologises hastily and instantly goes back to reading. FRASER-STUART looks back towards him, mystified. CUT TO: INT. ST MATTHEW’S COLLEGE, LEO’S ROOMS -MORNING The furniture is pulled to one side and the floor is covered with the schematics MICHAEL received from AUSTRIA. LEO watches from his chair, his fingers hovering over the keyboard of his COMPUTER, while MICHAEL, lying on his stomach, carefully traces a line of conduits with a highlighting pen on the schematic. He stops, takes a pair of dividers and measures a section against a scale on the side of the schematic. He calls out to LEO, who taps a number into the COMPUTER. CUT TO: EXT. NEW CAVENDISH LABORATORIES - NIGHT Establishing shot of the physics lab by night. We move in on a burning light on the first floor. CUT TO: INT. SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS ROOM - NIGHT A hi-tech palace. Television monitors in a row are labelled v Met. Sat IV, vGeo.Sat.II’ and so on. The screens show thermal-imaging pictures, weather systems, spectrographic analyses and similar images. Below them

109

desks of knobs, lights and keyboards. Dazzling and expensive. MICHAEL is perched on a bench, pulling a wedge of pizza from a box. There is a security badge pinned to his T- shirt. LEO, also equipped with a security badge, has TIM open on a stool under a satellite comms desk. Cabling is connected from TIM to the control array. MICHAEL watches, faintly bored. The TV monitor above TIM shows an area of Central Europe at dusk. Underneath is given the time. Suddenly MICHAEL jerks upright and looks at his watch. LEO looks up with horror. CUT TO: INT . THE NEWNHAM HOUSE - EVENING JANE is sitting at the kitchen table, elegant in a beautiful black evening dress. A half finished bottle of wine is beside her. The door flies open and a panting MICHAEL stands there. JANE gives him a murderous stare. CUT TO: INT. ST MATTHEW’S SENIOR COMBINATION ROOM NIGHT JANE and MICHAEL enter the S . C . R. in evening dress. MICHAEL’S collar is awry, he is pink, shiny and panting, Jane is pale and angry. The S.C.R. is filled with chattering FELLOWS and GUESTS, also in evening dress. JANE grits her teeth and beams apology at the MASTER of the college, who does not look pleased. MICHAEL stares across the room at the immaculately dressed LEO, who shakes his head, tut-tutting and looking at his pocket-watch reprovingly. CUT TO: INT . ST MATTHEW’ S OLD HALL - NIGHT A formal banquet is taking place at High Table. College STEWARDS, white-gloved, are

110

pouring wine and serving soup. JANE and MICHAEL are sitting next to each other, JANE has her back pointedly to MICHAEL. An OLD PROFESSOR stares at MICHAEL’S ineptly tied bow-tie. MICHAEL attempts to improve the situation by adjusting the bow-tie in the reflection from a large silver epergne in the centre of the table. The result is comically worse. MICHAEL sinks back frustrated and bored. He shoots a look at LEO who raises his eyebrows. MICHAEL looks a question back at him. LEO winks. MICHAEL smiles as LEO rises from the table and bids farewell to those sitting either side of him clutching his temples as if he had a terrible headache. MICHAEL waits for him to go and then does the same thing: rises, clutches his temples and grins a boyish and apologetic grin. JANE slaps him hard across the face. Soup spoons are dropped, eyes pop. MICHAEL leaves the room. CUT TO: INT. SATELLITE COMMS ROOM - NIGHT LEO, jacket off, bow-tie undone, smiles as MICHAEL, also rid of his jacket, ruefully strokes his cheek. LEO turns to TIM, rubs his hands and throws some switches. FADE TO: INT. SATELLITE COMMS ROOM - NIGHT CLOSE on MICHAEL as he starts awake. LEO is gazing down at him, shaking his shoulder. MICHAEL What time is it? LEO Six. We should be gone. MICHAEL sits upright. He has been lying along a bench, his dinner jacket bunched into a pillow under his neck. He springs down to the floor. LEO

111

Youth. It would take me ten minutes to stand up after lying in that position. Come. Breakfast. CUT TO: EXT. KING’S PARADE - MORNING We crane down from King’s College, past the chapel and porter’s lodge and onto the exterior of The Copper Kettle, a tea-room. Through the window, we see the profiles of MICHAEL and LEO, sitting at a table. We hear their dialogue, over. MICHAEL (over) Well? LEO (over) I prefer the eggs a little less runny. MICHAEL (over) You know what I mean. How close are we? CUT TO: INT. THE COPPER KETTLE - MORNING LEO is taking a sip of hot chocolate. Over the mug he looks gravely at MICHAEL. MICHAEL (continuing) A week? Ten days? What? LEO A few more tests . MICHAEL What kind of tests? LEO It is difficult. Like the ring-pulls on soda cans . Say what? MICHAEL LEO The only way to test a ring- pull is to use it. But when it is used it is destroyed. You see the problem? It is the same with a folded parachute. Or a crash barrier. Impossible to test. MICHAEL What are you saying? LEO I’m saying that I can go over the math so many times. I can check the programming so many times. In the end, the only real test is the use. MICHAEL

112

(leaning forward in an urgent whisper) WHEN? LEO Next week, I think. Thursday. But Michael . . . LEO touches MICHAEL’S sleeve. LEO (continuing) . . . you have to understand what we are trying to do here. MICHAEL I understand. LEO I don’t believe that you do. Nothing will be the same. Nothing. MICHAEL But that’s the point! (excited) Everything will be better. We’re going to make a better world. LEO nods and stabs an egg with his fork. The yolk squirts out all over the plate. LEO Maybe. CUT TO: EXT. NEWNHAM - MORNING MICHAEL bicycles to his house. He passes the NEWSPAPER DELIVERY GIRL, who gives him a wide berth, swerving dramatically to avoid him. MICHAEL smiles to himself. He lets himself into the house and closes the door behind him. CUT TO: INT . MICHAEL’S HOUSE - MORNING MICHAEL wheels the bicycle into the hall quietly and tiptoes towards the bedroom. The bed is empty. MICHAEL stands and stares. He goes to one of the closets and opens it. Bare . He goes to the study. JANE’s desk is swept clean. There are boxes piled up. He stares at the labels. PLEASE LEAVE: TO BE COLLECTED MICHAEL hurries to the kitchen. On the table, propped up against a teapot, there is a NOTE. We move onto the note at speed. It reads, in a strong, feminine hand: THIS TIME I MEAN IT

113

FADE OUT: Making Moves Leo captures a pawn I sat there for a bit, at the kitchen table, feeling seriously cheesed. I fade from Hollywood screenplay format to dull old, straight old prose because that’s how it felt. That’s how it always feels in the end. I said it before and I’ll say it again: books are dead, plays are dead, poems are dead: there’s only movies. Music is still okay, because music is soundtrack. Ten, fifteen years ago, every arts student wanted to be a novelist or a playwright. I’d be amazed if you could find a single one now with such a dead-end ambition. They all want to make movies. All wanna make movies. Not write movies. You don’t write movies. You make movies. But movies are hard to live up to. When you walk along the street, you’re in a movie; when you have a row, you’re in a movie; when you make love, you’re in a movie. When you skim stones over the water, buy a newspaper, park your car, line up in a McDonald’s, stand on a rooftop looking down, meet a friend, joke in the pub, wake suddenly in the night or fall asleep dead drunk, you’re in a movie. But when you are alone, dead alone, without props or costars, then you’re on the cutting-room floor. Or, worse, you’re in a novel; you’re on stage, stuck inside a monologue; you’re trapped in a poem. You are CUT. Movies are action. In movies things happen. You are what you do. What’s inside your head means nothing until you act. Gesture, expression, action. You don’t think. You act. You react. To things. Events. You make things happen. You make your history and your future. You cut the wires that defuse the bomb, you lay out the villain, you save the community, you throw your badge into the dirt and walk away, you fold your arms around the girl and slowly fade to black. You never have to think. Your eyes might dart





Unknown




114

from the alien monster to the fizzing power cables as a plan comes to you, but you never have to think. The perfect stage hero is Hamlet. The perfect film hero is Lassie. Your history - ‘back story’ they call it in Hollywood - only counts insofar as it informs the present, the now, the Action of the movie of your life. And that’s how we all live today. In scenes. God is not the Author of the Universe, he is the screenwriter of your Bio-pic. Lines you always hear in movies: Don’t talk about it, just do it. I’ve got a bad feeling about this. Gentlemen, we have a situation here. I don’t have time for a conversation. Move it, mister. Lines you always read in novels: I wondered what he meant. He knew in his heart it was wrong. She loved, above all, the way his hair stuck up when he became agitated or excited. Nothing made sense any more. So there I sat, in a state, in a novel, in a kitchen, rhythmically tugging at my hair and staring with dead eyes at the dead note. No action possible, only contemplation. This time I mean it. I had planned - that was the joke - I had planned to tell Jane all about everything that very morning. No, not tell her all about everything. I would avoid mention of her little pill. The thing would be dressed up as an experiment, something that Leo and I were doing as it were in vitro. An investigation of time and historical possibility. A project undertaken for fun and scholarship. This would explain my unusual sleeping patterns, my abstraction, my air of barely suppressed excitement, my spaced-outness, without hinting at danger or recklessness.

115

The weird thing was that Jane had not once, over the past week or so, asked me what I had been up to. She had not stood, arms folded, at the kitchen door, tapping her slippered foot on the floor with a what-time-of-the-nightdo- you-call-ffo-then kind of an air. She had not stared me down with a fearsome ‘Well?’ nor breathed heavily out through her nostrils nor, in pretending to ignore me, had she hummed jauntily to annoy as lovers often will. Nothing. Just a faint, sighing distraction, a sad distance. And now she was gone. For good. Or ill. Maybe, I thought, maybe destiny was clearing the decks for me. Emptying my present life of connections so that I could embark on the new life that Leo and I were preparing to create. It was insane of course. I knew that. It couldn’t possibly work. You can’t change the past. You can’t redesign the present. Hell, you probably can’t even redesign the future. Hitler was born, you can’t make him unborn. Crazy. But what a test of my knowledge. I - who knew more than anyone about Passau and Brunau and Linz and Spital and all the other tedious details of little Adolf s squalid upbringing - was being tested on that knowledge like no one ever had been before. The historian as God. I know so much about you, Mr So-Called Hitler, that I can stop you from being born. For all your clever-clever speeches, and swanky uniforms, and torchlight parades, and death- dealing Panzers, and murdering ovens, and high and mighty airs. For all that, you are entirely at the mercy of a graduate student who has boned up on your early life. Eat it, big boy. For Leo, of course, it was a mission with meaning. The real truth of that mission, the blinding shock of it, came out two days after Jane left me. I had tried to find her, naturally. As before I had gone to her laboratory in search of reconciliation. I would dance a charming, silly dance and Jane would pat and patronise me and all would be well. Ish.

116

Red-haired Donald was there. The grotesque lump of his Adam’s apple bounced up and down in his white neck as he gulped his embarrassment. ‘Jane has … er … sort of, you know … gone off ‘Eggs go off. Pints of milk go off. Bombs go off. What are you talking about?’ ‘Princeton. A research grant. She didn’t tell you about it then?’ ‘Princeton?’ ‘New Jersey.’ Great. Fucking A. ‘No phone number, I don’t suppose?’ Donald lifted his bony shoulders a couple of times. I looked at him with loathing. ‘What’s with that? Semaphore for her dialling code?’ He pushed back his spectacles with a thumb. ‘She particularly asked I started towards him. His eyes widened in fear and he flung up a hand. But I knew the type. Can’t get me on that. Thin, weedy, brainy, knobbly, weak. They are the ones to look out for. The mulish obstinacy of the weak is harder to break than the determination of the strong. ‘Bollocks!’ I shouted into his face. ‘Tell her, bollocks. If she asks after me, tell her I said bollocks.’ He nodded, the cold ivory of his anaemic cheeks patched with highlights of mucky orange pink. I put my hand to a row of neatly labelled test-tubes. He croaked in alarm. Then everything in me slowed. I saw the blue veins on Donald’s throat twitch and his mouth fall wetly open. I felt the muscles in my arm gather for a huge push that would send the test-tubes flying across the laboratory floor. I heard the blood in my ears roar as it was sent surging to my brain by the tornado of anger in my chest. I pulled my arm suddenly back as if I had been burned. On each test-tube a blue meniscus swayed with faint relief and Donald’s dry throat swallowed with a rasping gulp.

117

Maybe I was a cunt on the inside, but not on the outside. Just couldn’t do it. I walked from the room whistling. Leo affected a complete lack of surprise. ‘She’ll write you,’ he said. ‘You can bet on it.’ He was concentrating on his remote chess, tugging at his beard and frowning at the position laid out on the table in front of him. Just a couple of kings and rooks and a pair of pawns. ‘Same game?’ I asked, plucking at the horsehair leaking from the arm of my chair. ‘It comes to a crisis. Endgame. The chamber music of chess it is called. In my hands, more like the chamber pot of chess. I find it so hard to make the right moves.’ Stick to physics, I thought to myself, eyeing his self- satisfied giggle with disgust, and leave the jokes to others. ‘Who’s the guy you’re playing?’ I asked. ‘Kathleen Evans, her name is.’ ‘She a physicist too?’ ‘Sure. Without her work I could never have built Tim.’ ‘She knows about Tim?’ ‘No. But I think maybe she is working on something similar with her colleagues at Princeton.’ ‘Princeton?’ ‘The Institute of Advanced Studies. Not connected to the University.’ ‘Still. All the same. Princeton. I hate the fucking place.’ ‘Einstein went to Princeton. Many other refugees too.’ ‘Jane is not a refugee,’ I said coldly. ‘She’s a deserter.’ ‘You know Hitler made a great mistake there,’ Leo said, ignoring me. ‘Berlin University and the Gottingen Institute contained most of the men who invented modern physics and a large number of them fled to America. Germany could have had an atom bomb in 1939. Earlier maybe.’ I rose impatiently and scanned the books again. ‘What’s with Jews and science anyway?’ I said.

118

‘Half the scientists here today are Asian. Indian, Pakistani, Chinese, Korean. Something to do with being an alien maybe. No cultural roots, no place in society. Numbers are universal.’ ‘This Princeton babe you’re playing chess with, this Kathleen Evans. She’s not an alien by the sound of it.’ ‘She is British, so in America, yes, she is an alien.’ ‘Another deserter.’ Leo did not dignify this with a response. ‘Anyway,’ I said. ‘You should at least be able to crush her at chess.’ ‘How so?’ ‘You Jews are brilliant at chess. Everyone knows that. Fischer, Kasparov, those guys.’ ‘You Jews? Leo looked up from the board in surprise. ‘You know what I mean. You Jewish people, if you prefer.’ ‘Ah,’ he said softly. ‘You haven’t understood have you? It’s my fault of course.’ He rose from his chair and came up to rrie in front of the bookcase and placed a hand on my shoulder. ‘Michael,’ he said. ‘I am not a Jew. Not Jewish.’ I stared at him. ‘But, you said ‘I never said I was a Jew, Michael. When did I ever say I was a Jew?’ ‘Your father. Auschwitz! You said …’ ‘I know what I said, Michael. Certainly my father was at Auschwitz. He was in the SS. That is what I live with.’ Making Smoke The Frenchman and the Colonel’s Helmet: I ‘You are impossible to live with, Adi,’ laughed Hans Mend, shrugging his shoulders with exaggerated good grace to concede the argument. ‘From now on, whatever you say goes. Black is white. The sun rises in the evening. Apples grow on telegraph poles. Denmark is the capital of Greece. I promise not to disagree with you again.’ ‘The truth is never welcome,’ said Adi superbly, putting the book away and jumping to retain his stride as they walked together along the duckboards.

119

Whenever you argue with him, Hans thought, he pulls out that wretched Schopenhauer. Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, The World as Will and Idea. It contained all the answers, it seemed. Above all it contained Adi’s favourite word, Weltanschauung. ‘The fact is this,’ said Adi. ‘I was reading the propaganda leaflets that the British use for their own troops.’ ‘But you don’t speak English!’ Adi shifted uncomfortably. To be reminded that there was anything he could not do displeased him. ‘Rudi translated for me,’ he growled. ‘Ah, of course!’ Rudolf Gloder’s English was, like everything else about him, entirely without fault. ‘The point is that the British in their pamphlets represent us Germans as barbarians and Huns.’ ‘Us Germans.’ If Weltanschauung was Adi’s favourite word, then this was his favourite phrase. ‘We Germans believe …’ ‘We Germans will not accept …’ And Adi himself a Wienerschnitzel. But that’s ‘them Austrians’ for you, thought Hans. ‘Of course they say that,’ he said. ‘It’s propaganda. What do you expect? Extravagant compliments?’ ‘That is not the issue. They are lies, naturally, but they are psychologically sound lies. They prepare the British soldier for the terrors of war, they preserve him from disappointment. He arrives at the Front and he sees that his enemy is indeed brutal, that war is certainly hellish. His leaders were right. This war will be a hard struggle. So Tommy digs down with added resolve. And what does our own propaganda tell the hopeful German boy, newly enlisted? That the British are cowards and can be crushed easily. That the French are lacking in discipline and for ever on the brink of mutiny. That Foch, Petain and Haig are fools. These are lies, but they are not psychologically sound. When our men arrive at the front they soon find out that the French are in fact deadly disciplined, that Tommy is far from a coward. Conclusion: Ludendorff is a liar, headquarters are nothing but rogues

120

and conmen. They begin to disbelieve the great phrase on the posters in Berlin, Der Sieg wird unser sein. The thought that this too might be a lie grows in their minds. Perhaps, they think, victory will not be ours. Result: a sapping of the will and low morale. Defeatism.’ ‘Maybe,’ said Hans uncertainly. ‘But you believe that victory is assured.’ ‘The belief is the point!’ Adi pounded his fist into his hand, his eyes bright with excitement. ‘The will creates the victory! Defeatism is a self-fulfilling prophecy! You do not create the will to win by telling bad lies that are easily found out. We will win if we will the winning. There is nothing we Germans cannot achieve if only we believe. Nor is there any depth to which we cannot sink when we lose our faith. There can be no room for doubt. A solid wall of belief is what we need, strong enough to defend our Germany against the enemy without and the cowardly incursions of the pacifists and shirkers within. Unity, only unity. If your own side does not believe your propaganda what hope is there that the enemy might?’ ‘That’s why you beat up that corporal?’ A few days earlier Adi had startled everyone by picking a fight with a hulking corporal from Nuremberg. ‘The war is a swindle from first to last,’ this corporal had said. ‘It’s not our war, it’s a Hohenzollern war. It’s a war of aristocrats and capitalists.’ ‘How dare you talk like that in front of the troops!’ Adi had screamed, hurling himself upon him. ‘Liar! Traitor! Bolshevik!’ Adi was a lance corporal, yet he had no respect for rank in and of itself. He had been offered a promotion years earlier, but there was no provision for promoting a regimental runner above the rank of Gefreiter, so Gefreiter he had remained. This full corporal, this Obergefreiter, had driven his gorilla fist into Adi’s face time and time again, but to no avail. A lack of will perhaps. An incorrect Weltanschauung. In the

121

end he fell into the mud, blood oozing from his nose and mouth, while Adi stood over him, sides heaving, lips flecked with creaming spittle. This incident had resulted in a loss of popularity amongst the newer men, despite Adi’s Iron Cross, Second Class and his reputation as scrounger of food and supplies, First Class. The old sweats, Ignaz Westen-kirchner, Ernst Schmidt, Rudi Gloder, Hans himself, they still felt great fondness for the bloody-minded Austrian. But he was trying to a fellow, no doubt about that. Life would be more comfortable without him. More comfortable, but more dangerous perhaps, for he knew no fear. They were nearing the main communication trench now, nicknamed the Kurfurstendamm after Berlin’s main shopping street. Adi slowed up. ‘I remember the first time I was ever deloused,’ he remarked, apropos of nothing. ‘October, four years ago,’ said Hans promptly. He raised his eyes past the Ku’damm and the forward trenches, across no man’s land towards Ypres. ‘Four years ago and four miles away. We’ve come full circle, Adi. A mile a year. Quite an achievement. Quite a war.’ He raised a defensive hand to his face in haste. ‘That’s not Bolshevism, I promise you! Just a foolish remark.’ To his surprise, Adi smiled with genuine glee. ‘Don’t worry, I never hit friends.’ Kameraden. Another favourite word. ‘The Lord be praised. I value this face.’ ‘I can’t think why.’ Heavens, thought Hans. That was almost a joke. ‘No, in fact that was not the first time,’ Adi continued. ‘The first time ever I was deloused was in Vienna nearly ten years ago. They called it an Obdachlo-senheim, but it was in fact a disgusting and humiliating prison. The pension money from my family had run out, no one was buying my paintings. I had no choice but to throw myself upon the mercy of the state.’

122

Hans shuddered slightly. Adi almost never spoke of his home or his background. When he did there was often an inconsistency and an overuse of melodramatic language that led many to suppose him a fantasist or a liar. ‘Throw myself upon the mercy of the state’ indeed! ‘Line up in a doss-house’ was all he meant. Bless him. ‘How terrible for you.’ Adi shrugged off the sympathy. ‘I made no complaints. Not then, not now. But I tell you this, Hans. Never again. Never again.’ ‘Never again? Never again?1 A cheerful voice behind them. ‘That doesn’t sound like our beloved Adolf!’ Rudi Gloder came up between them and clapped a hand to the shoulder of each. ‘Herr Hauptmann.” Adi and Hans snapped to a salute. Gloder’s steady succession of promotions in the field from Gefreiter to Obergefreiter, Stabsgefreiter and Unteroffizier, had been swift and inevitable. That he had crossed the Great Chasm and made it to Leutnant, Oberleutnant and now Hauptmann had surprised only those who had never fought and lived alongside him. Some men are born to rise. ‘Cut that out,’ said Rudi shyly. ‘Only salute when other officers are watching. So tell me, what is this talk of never again?’ ‘Only this, sir,’ said Adi. ‘Hans and I were talking about the Frenchman and the Colonel’s helmet.’ Hans was astonished at the fluency of the lie. So fast and so natural. That Adi did not wish to talk to anybody about his less than glorious past in Vienna was natural. That he should be most reluctant in front of Gloder of all people, that too was to be expected. Adi was more resistant to Rudi’s charms than the others were. Hugo Gutmann, their old adjutant, he had actively loathed Gloder, but then Gutmann was a Jew and Rudi had never been afraid to show his contempt for him, indeed had once called him to his face an aufgeblasene Puffmutter. Adi had no time for Gutmann either, even though it had been Gutmann

123

who had so energetically pushed through a recommendation for his Iron Cross. So it was certainly not loyalty to Gutmann that caused Adi to be less impressed than most by Rudi’s radiant personality. Nonetheless, immune or not, it was strange to lie so easily and casually to a Kamerad … strange and a little ¦ disturbing. ‘The Frenchman and the Colonel’s Helmet?’ said Rudi. ‘It sounds like the title of a cheap farce.’ ‘You haven’t heard?’ Adi sounded surprised. ‘One of the men watching the enemy trenches this morning saw Colonel Baligand’s Pickelhaube, his best Imperial lobster- tailed helmet, being waved triumphantly backwards and forwards on the end of a rifle. They must have captured it in the raid on Fleck’s dug-out last night.’ ‘French bastards,’ said Rudi. ‘Child-molesting shits.’ ‘I was saying to Mend here, sir. We must get it back.’ ‘Certainly we must get it back! It is a question of the pride of the regiment. We must retrieve it and return with a trophy of our own. These piss-blooded children of the Sixth have to be shown how real men fight.’ o It had been a matter of some annoyance to the original troops of the Regiment List that, depleted as they had been by four years of fighting, they now found themselves saddled with the Sixth Franconian Infantry Regiment, an unwelcome excrescence. These newcomers, to the veteran Bavarians’ way of thinking, were feeble and halfhearted weaklings in need of greater discipline and courage. ‘I asked the Major’s permission to go alone on a raid tonight,’ said Adi. ‘It’s in Sector K, north of the new French battery there. I know the place backwards. After all they were our trenches not so long ago. I took messages there regularly. But the Major said …’ here Adi brought off a creditable impersonation of the regiment’s present adjutant (the Jew Gutmann had been killed leading an assault earlier in the year) ‘… he said that he “couldn’t

124

possibly sacrifice a man in the cause of such reckless adventurism”, so I don’t know what we can do now.’ He looked expectantly at Gloder, and Hans could swear there was an undertone of challenge to Adi’s voice. ‘Major Eckert is, of course,’ said Gloder, ‘a Franconian. Hm. This needs thinking about.’ Hans looked at Adi carefully. The pale blue eyes were gazing with excited expectation into Rudi’s face. Hans was puzzled. Was he angling for new permission to go on a raid? He must know that a Hauptmann cannot overturn the orders of a Major. For that matter, Hans could not imagine when Adi had asked Eckert’s approval for such an action. They had been together nearly all day. Perhaps when Hans had gone to the latrines for his morning turn-out. It was very odd. ‘If I had a crack at it,’ said Adi wistfully, ‘do you think Eckert would overlook the insubordination? I’d just love to ..,’ ‘You can’t disobey a direct order,’ said Rudi. ‘Leave it with Papa. I’ll think of something.’ Mend was tasting his first foul mug of ersatz coffee the next morning when Ernst Schmidt approached, in a state of uncharacteristic excitement. ‘Hans! Have you heard? Oh God, it’s too terrible.’ ‘Heard what? I’ve only just got up, for Christ’s sake.’ ‘Look then. Take a look!’ With shaking hands, Ernst thrust a pair of field-glasses under the other’s nose. Hans took up his helmet and went grumbling forward to the nearest trench ladder, easing his head slowly above the parapet line. The usually taciturn Ernst Schmidt must be losing control, he thought to himself. ‘Three o’clock! To the left of the flooded shell-hole. There!’ ‘Get down, you fool! Do you want to get us both shot?’ ‘There! Can you see? Oh God, the ruin of it …’ Suddenly, Hans saw.

125

Gloder lay face up, his sightless eyes staring at the risen sun, his ivory throat open and scarlet pools of jellied blood spread down his tunic like frozen lakes of lava. A metre or so beyond his outflung fist, Colonel Maximilian Baligand’s grand ceremonial lobster-tailed Pickelhaube stood, spike upwards, as if the Colonel himself, buried underground, were wearing it still. Over one shoulder, in casual Hussar style, hung the richly braided mess-jacket of a French brigadier. A movement in the foreground caught Hans’s attention. Slowly, centimetre by centimetre, from the direction of the German lines, a man was crawling on his stomach towards the body. ‘My God,’ whispered Hans. ‘It’s Adi!’ ‘Where?’ Hans passed the field-glasses over to Ernst. ‘Damn it, if we start up any covering fire, the French will spot him for sure. Get down, we’ll use periscopes. It’s safer.’ For twenty minutes they watched, in silent prayer, as Adi wormed his way towards the wire. ‘Careful, Adi!’ Hans breathed to himself. ‘Zoll fiir Zoll, mein Kamerad.’ Adi edged his way along the main roll of wire between himself and Rudi until he came to a section marked with tiny fragments of cloth, a coded doorway left by the wiring parties. This entrance safely negotiated he resumed his belly-down journey to the body. Once he had got there- ‘What now?’ said Ernst. ‘Smoke!’ said Hans. ‘Now he’s there, we can put up smoke between him and the enemy forward trenches. Quick!’ Ernst bellowed for smoke pistols while Hans continued to watch. Adi, lying face down, seemed to be blindly feeling the wound in Rudi’s back. ‘What’s he doing?’ ‘I don’t know.’ ‘Perhaps Rudi isn’t dead!’

126

‘Of course he’s dead, didn’t you see his eyes?’ ‘Then what’s Adi doing?’ Hans couldn’t see for his view of body was obscured by Adi rising on all fours. ‘Jesus, get down, you maniac!’ Hans whispered. As if he had heard, Adi suddenly dropped flat again and lay motionless beside Gloder’s corpse. ‘My God! Has he been hit?’ ‘We would have heard.’ ‘He’s frozen up, then!’ Hans became aware of a gathering commotion in his own trench. He pulled back from the periscope and looked about him. Ernst’s alarm had alerted dozens of men. No, not men. Boys, most of them. A few had periscopes themselves and were relaying, in fatuous commentary, every detail of the scene. The others turned their big, frightened eyes on Hans. ‘Why isn’t he moving? He’s frozen. Has he lost his nerve?’ The sight of a man freezing up in no man’s land was a common one. One minute you were running and dodging, the next you were stiff as a statue. ‘Not Adi,’ said Hans as cheerfully as he could. ‘He’s recovering his strength for the homeward run, that’s all.’ He turned back to the periscope. Still no movement. ‘Everyone with a smoke pistol, get ready,’ he called. Half a dozen men crept to the top of ladders, their pistols cocked back over their shoulders, cowboy fashion. Hans wetted his finger and checked the wind before settling back to watch. Suddenly, with no warning, Adi was up, facing the enemy. He hooked his arms under Rudi’s and pulled him backwards towards the German lines, hopping backwards with bent knees like a Cossack dancer. ‘Now!’ shouted Hans. ‘Fire! Fire high and five minutes to the left!’ The smoke pistols clapped a polite round of applause. Hans watched Adi as the bombs fell beyond him and a dense curtain of smoke rose and thickened, drifting

127

gently in the wind between him and the French forward trenches. Adi lurched on towards the home lines without a pause or backward glance. Perhaps he had been relying on the smoke screen, Hans thought. He trusted that we would know what to do. Perhaps he would have risked it anyway. Hans always knew Adi had the courage, but he would never have credited him with such brute strength. ‘What the hell is going on here?’ Major Eckert had stamped into the trench, moustache quivering. ‘Who gave orders to send up smoke?’ A young Franconian saluted smartly. ‘It’s Gefreiter Hitler, sir.’ ‘Hitler? Who authorised him to issue such an order?’ ‘No, sir. He didn’t order it, sir. He’s out there, sir. In Niemandsland. Recovering Hauptmann Gloder’s body, sir. ‘Gloder? Hauptmann Gloder dead? How? What?’ ‘He went out last night to rescue Colonel Baligand’s helmet.’ ‘Colonel Baligand’s helmet? Are you drunk, man?’ ‘No, Herr Major. The French must have taken it during Thursday’s raid up the line, sir. Hauptmann Gloder went to rescue it. He did too, and what’s more he pinched a brigadier’s mess-jacket as well. But then a sniper must have got him, sir.’ ‘Good heavens!’ ‘Sir, yes sir. And Gefreiter Hitler is out rescuing the body now sir. Stabsgefreiter Mend ordered us to protect him with smoke.’ ‘Is this true, Mend?’ Mend stood to attention. ‘Quite true, sir. I believed it to be the best course.’ ‘But damn it, the French might be led into the belief that we are attacking.’ Mend was too dazed and horrified to think clearly, but he managed a reply. ‘Respectfully, Herr Major, that can do little harm. All that will happen is that Franzmann will waste a few thousand valuable rounds.’

128

‘Well, it’s all very irregular.’ Not as irregular as you, you shithead schoolmaster, thought Mend, before giving himself up to more miserable considerations. ‘And where’s Hitler now?’ Schmidt bellowed the answer from behind his field- glasses. ‘He’s at the wire sir! Sir, he’s all right sir! He’s found the doorway. He’s got the body. And the helmet, sir! He’s even got the helmet!’ A great roar of delight went up from the men and even Major Eckert allowed himself a smile. Hans, in his puzzled dismay, repeated and repeated to himself, Eckert knew nothing about it until just now. Eckert knew nothing. Adi never told Eckert about the Colonel’s helmet yesterday. Adi never asked him permission to go on a raid. Yet he told me and Rudi that he had. Why had Adi lied? Hans walked slowly out of the trench just as Rudi’s corpse rolled into it. Adi followed, the Colonel’s helmet raised aloft in his right hand, the gold eagle stamped upon it flashing in the sun. As Hans moved away, the cheering of the men grew and swelled inside him until it burst from his eyes in a flood of hot, disgusted tears. Making Amends Axel Bauer’s story Leo wiped the tears from his cheeks with the back of his hand. I sat quietly in the armchair, plucking horsehair and watching him nervously. I had never seen a grown man cry before. Outside a movie that is. In movies grown men cry all the time. But silently. Leo was crying with noisy sobs and great gulping catches of breath. I waited for this horrible tempest to blow itself out. After two or three minutes he had taken off his spectacles and was polishing them with the fat of his tie. He blinked his wet red eyes across at me. ‘Oh, I know. Why did I not tell you before? Why did I let you believe that I was a Jew?’

129

I made a sound somewhere between a grunt and a whine, intended to convey assent, open-mindedness, understanding … I don’t know, something like that. But the way the noise emerged I seemed to be suggesting that the ball was with Leo, that it was up to him to do the talking, that I was reserving judgement. He must have taken it that way too. ‘You must know that this is not something you talk about so easily. Indeed it is something I have never talked about before. Except to myself.’ I cast around for a constructive observation. ‘Zuckermann …’ I said. ‘It is a Jewish name, isn’t it? There’s a conductor, musician, something like that?’ ‘Pinchas Zuckermann. He is a violinist and conductor. Viola player too. Every time I see his name on a record, in a newspaper, I wonder …” Leo replaced his glasses and sank down into the armchair opposite me. We sat facing each other as on the day we met. No coffee or hot chocolate this time. Just the space between us. ‘My father’s real name was Bauer,’ said Leo. ‘Dietrich Josef Bauer. He was born in Hanover, July 1904. Throughout the 1920s he trained in histology and radiology and took a research post at the Anatomical Institute at the University of Miinster, under Professor Johannes Paul Kremer, about whom you shall hear more. My father joined the National Socialist German Workers’ Party in 1932 and was for two years Sturmarzt in Number 8. SS- Reiterstandart.’ ‘Sturmarzt? ‘Doctor. Almost everything in the SS begins with the word “storm”. What else do you need to know about them, other than that they called their physicians Storm Doctors? Storm doctors1.’ New tears were springing up in his eyes and he shook his head back and forth. ‘Nature cries out.’ For the first time in my life, I really wished that I smoked. I noticed that my left leg was bouncing up and down

130

uncontrollably on the ball of its foot, a habit I thought it had abandoned since I was a screwed-up sixteen-yearold. ‘Be that as it may,’ said Leo, removing his glasses and wiping his eyes once more. ‘In 1941 my father was enlisted to the Reserve Waffen-SS with the rank of SS- Hauptscharfuhrer, a kind of senior sergeant, like a sergeant major I suppose, but without the duties of drill and so forth. A courtesy rank. This much I found out from my own research.’ ‘You didn’t know him, then? Your father?’ ‘We come to that. In September 1942 he was practising at the SS Hospital in Prague and received a message from his old teacher Professor Kremer, who had first encouraged him into the SS and had since been promoted to the junior officer rank of Untersturmfuhrer, working on temporary assignment in a small town in Poland no one had ever heard of, a town called Auschwitz. Kremer wanted to return to his post in academia and recommended my father as a suitable replacement. I was four years old. My mother and I were living still in Miinster. My Christian name was Axel. I have no memory of that time. We were summoned to join Papa in Poland in October 1942 and there we remained for two and a half years.’ ‘Actually inside Auschwitz?’ ‘Good God, no! In the town. Yes, the town. Always the town.’ I nodded. ‘You ask if I remember my father. I tell you what I remember now, memories that have come back to me after years of absence. This happens as one ages as doubtless you know. I remember now a man who was forever injecting me. For diphtheria, typhus, cholera. Auschwitz town had many outbreaks of fever and he was determined that I should not succumb. I remember too a man who would come home in the evenings with packages. Bottles of Croatian plum wine, whole freshly

131

killed rabbits and partridges, cakes of perfumed soap, jars of ground coffee and, for me, coloured paper and crayons. These were all supreme luxuries, you must understand. Once he even brought home a pineapple. A pineapple! He never spoke of his work, except to say that he never spoke of his work. That is why I use the word “work”. It was his word. He was kind and funny and at the time I believe I loved him with my whole heart.’ ‘And what exactly … what was his work?’ ‘His job was to treat the sick amongst the officers and men of the SS and to attend the Sonderaktionen as a medical observer.’ ‘Soni.tr ‘Special Actions. The actions for which the death camps were built. The gassings. They called them Special Actions. Also …’ Leo paused and looked beyond me towards the window for a moment. ‘Also, my father continued some medical experiments that had been initiated by Kremer. The removal of live organs for study. The two of them were interested in the rates of cellular atrophy amongst the malnourished and the physically weak. Particularly where this affected the young. Kremer wrote to my father from Miinster in 1943 asking him to carry on with the work and to send him the data regularly.’ I watched as Leo rose and went to the bookshelf. He took down a small black and white book and rifled through the pages. ‘Kremer kept a diary, you know. It was his downfall. He was at Auschwitz for three months only, but it was enough. The diary was confiscated by the British who allowed him to be extradited to Poland. Extracts are included in this book which was published in Germany in 1988.1 read to you. “10th October 1942. Extracted and fixed fresh live material from liver, spleen, and pancreas. Got prisoners to make me a signature stamp. For first time heated the room. More cases of typhus fever and Typhus abdominalis. Camp quarantine continues.” Next

132

day. “Today, Sunday, there was roast hare for lunch - a real fat leg - with dumplings and red cabbage. 17th October. Attended trial and eleven executions. Extracted fresh live material from liver, spleen and pancreas after injection of pilocarpin. Attended nth Sonderaktion in cold wet weather this morning, Sunday. Horrible scenes with three naked women who begged us for their lives.” And so on and so on and so on. This was Kremer’s three months. His entire contribution to the Final Solution of the Jewish Problem in Europe. My father’s life there must have been very similar, but he kept no diary. No diary and no letters remain from his two and a half years.’ Leo placed a pause between each word. ‘Two. And. A. Half. Years.’ I swallowed. ‘And was your father also captured? At the end of the war?’ ‘Always my mind goes back, I can’t think why,’ said Leo, ignoring me entirely, ‘to that one entry of Kremer’s: “Got prisoners to make me a signature stamp.” Why is it, when one contemplates history, that one never considers things like this? You picture the gas chambers, the ovens, the dogs, the brutality of the guards, the disease, the terror of the children, the anguish of the mothers, the imponderable cruelty, the horror that cannot be described, but “Got prisoners to make me a signature stamp.” A brilliant Professor, head of an anatomy school, finds himself assigned to a concentration camp. After a week or so he gets tired of signing endless orders. Orders to do what, do we suppose? Orders for new supplies of phenol and aspirin? Orders to have these or those sick prisoners declared unfit for work and processed for Special Action? Orders to authorise the extraction of live organs? Who knows? Just orders. So, “Damn it,” he says one morning to a colleague. “I can’t persuade the quartermaster to issue me with a signature stamp. He tells me that I am only a temporary and that it will take two months for a stamp to come through from Berlin.”

133

“What’s the big deal?” says his friend. “Get the prisoners to make you one.” ‘And how does he proceed, this brilliant Professor with two PhDs, who has sent two generations of trained healers and surgeons into the world? How does he go about putting this simple, obvious idea into action? Does he send for a prisoner, a Jewish Kapo perhaps, and tell him to sort it out for him? Does he walk one day into a hut and say, as the prisoners stand to attention, “Look here, do any of you have skills m stationery? I need someone to make me a signature stamp. Volunteers, please.” Who knows? Somehow, whatever the procedure, it is conveniently arranged. Kremer signs his name, “Johannes Paul Kremer” on a piece of paper and gives it to the chosen prisoner. What is the process, do we suppose? While the ink is still wet, the prisoner presses an uncut rubber stamp to the paper. The mirror- image of the signature is transferred onto the stamp. The prisoner carefully cuts away the rest of the rubber. He does this maybe in an office, in a workshop, someplace where he is allowed access to knives. Maybe it takes him an hour, maybe longer to be sure of doing a good job and pleasing Herr Professor Obersturmfuhrer Kremer, who is a man worth pleasing. So now Professor Kremer is the proud owner of a stamp bearing the perfect simulacrum of his signature, the twentieth century equivalent of a signet ring or Great Seal. He no longer has the arduous task of having to sign his own name to pieces of paper. All he has to do is stamp. Bang, bang!’ Leo thumped the side of his right fist into the open palm of his left hand with a violence and volume that shocked me upright. ‘And what of the prisoner who made the stamp? Will one day his name be above the signature he so carefully cut out? Bang, bang! And what of my father? When he arrived did he too have a signature stamp made for him by a prisoner, or did he wait for Berlin to supply him with something more official, something a little classier? Bang,

134

bang!’ He paused from breath. ‘Here, I make myself some chocolate. Coffee for you. Maybe some cookies to nibble.’ I nodded dumbly. ‘How sick to talk of chocolate and coffee and cookies after such a conversation, you are thinking,’ Leo said when he had returned from setting the kettle. ‘You are right. The same disgusted thought strikes when one reads the writings of the men who ran the camps. “Pathetic attempt at a rebellion in the shower rooms this morning. A dozen or so naked Muslims -” they called Jewish women Muslims, did you know that? “- a dozen or so naked Muslims tried to escape. Kretschmer shot each one in the leg and made them hop up and down for ten minutes before liquidating them. The most comical sight. Wonderful beer for lunch, sent up from Bohemia. Excellent veal and real ground coffee to follow. Weather still abominable.” That kind of thing you read again and again and again. Or the letters home. “Darling Trudi, My God this is a dreadful place. The steadfastness of the men in their work is frankly heroic. More Jews arrive every day, always so much to be done. You would be proud if you could see how little complaint the guards and officers make as they go about their tasks in the camp. With so much to provoke them from the apemen Jews and their stink. Give Mutti a kiss for me and tell Erich I want to hear a better report from school!” This is the way of it.’ ‘The banality of evil,’ I murmured. Leo frowned. ‘Perhaps. I am never sure about this phrase. Ah, I hear the kettle.’ Outside the window a lawnmower started up. A telephone was ringing unanswered in the room below. With the same rather feminine care as before, Leo set down the tray on the low table between us and poured out a coffee for me. ‘So. One day in 1945 my mother calls me to her. Papa is standing beside her in his uniform. The black uniform of, by this time, an SS-Sturmbannfuhrer. The uniform that

135

even today provokes terror in millions and sick admiration and lust in an insane few. The shaped, black cap that bears the Death’s Head along its band, the collar flashes that spell out “SS” in lightning strikes - this alone, such a masterstroke of design! What they would call today a “logo”, no? - the puffed out jodhpurs, the shining boots, the hunting-crop to strike manfully against the thigh, the cuffs, the tie, the crisp shirt. The genius of the Nazis. Such a uniform has the power to turn the most laughable oaf into a towering Ubermensch. Even the names of the rank carry this power of totem. Sturmbannfiihrer. Straighten the peak of your cap in front of a mirror, raise your right hand in salute, click your heels together and say, “Ich bin Sturmbannfuhrer. Heil Hitler!” Young children do it in play all over the world. The uniform, the language, the style. To the sane world they are the symbol of all that is strutting, arrogant, cruel, barbarian and bestial. All the things that shame us. To me they are the symbol of all that is Papa.’ ‘But that’s not your fault.’ ‘Michael, we will come to blame later, if you please.’ I raised a hand in apology. Hey, this was his game. His ball. His rules. ‘So, my mother calls to me this one day and I come. Papa kneels down in front of me and smooths back my hair. As he does when he wants to feel my brow for fever. ‘”Axi,” he says to me. “You are going to have to look after Mutti for a while. Do you think you can do that for me?” ‘I do not understand, but I look across at my mother, who is in tears and I nod my head. ‘My father, still on his haunches, turns to his medical bag. “That’s my soldier! First I must do something that will hurt a little. For your own good. You understand?” ‘I nod my head again. I am used to injections. ‘But this injection hurts more than any other I have had. It takes a long time to perform and I am screaming in pain. Such pain bewilders and upsets me, but Mutti is there, stroking my hair and shushing me. A part of me

136

understands that this is done in love. At last Papa gives me a kiss and then he stands and kisses Mutti. He pulls down sharply on his tunic to straighten the creases, gathers his medical bag and leaves the house. This is the last time I see him.’ Leo paused to blow across the surface of his chocolate before taking a careful sip. ‘So how old were you by this time?’ ‘I was six years old. All that I am telling you is what I know, not necessarily what I remember. Some things I do recall very clearly, most I do not. Little flashes, little islands of memory I have. I do not remember my mother explaining to me that we were to have a new name. I do not remember that I was once Axel Bauer, I cannot recall that my name was ever anything other than Leo Zuckermann. I know it, but I do not remember it.’ ‘So how did you find all this out?’ ‘In 1967 in America I am at Columbia University, New York City, doing well. A young professor, not so much older than you are now, with a big future ahead of him. A Jewish boy, a survivor of the Shoah, teaching at an Ivy League school. If this is not a perfect example of the escape from the European nightmare into the American dream, then there never was one. But I am called one day on the telephone and summoned into the nightmare once more. This time I will never leave. Your mother has collapsed, come at once, Leo. I drive like crazy over the bridge to Queens. When I arrive at my mother’s apartment I find hushed men and women gathered outside the room. A rabbi, a doctor, weeping friends. The old woman had been found on the kitchen floor. She is dying, the doctor says. I enter the bedroom alone. My mother signs for me to shut the door and come sit by her bed. She is weak but she finds enough strength to tell her story. My story. ‘She tells me what I have told you, that my real name is Axel Bauer, that my father was an SS doctor at Auschwitz. She tells me that by the end of 1944 my father knew for sure that the Russians were on their way, knew for sure

137

that there would be a reckoning, a retribution for what had been done. He was convinced that vengeance would be taken not just on him, but on his whole family. The Jewish people, my father believed, whose motto is an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, would not be satisfied with his own death. Of this he was sure. Most methodically he prepared a plan for the survival of his family. There was at the time a Jewish prisoner assisting in the surgery. A very brilliant doctor, originally from Krakow, by name of Abel Zuckermann. Zuckermann’s wife Hannah, a German Jewess from Berlin, and their young son Leo had naturally been gassed at once, for they were useless, but Zuckermann’s knowledge of hepatic diseases was deemed of some service and he was given work to do in the surgery. My father it seems was kind to Zuckermann and secretly he gave him small amounts of food and encouraged him to talk about himself. Over the few weeks my father learned a great deal about Zuckermann’s family, his history, his estranged brother in New York, his education, his background, how he met his wife, everything there was to know. ‘But a day came. This was the day the authorities decided that the Jew doctor had outlived his usefulness and that it was his Jew turn to join his Jew family in Jew Hell. Maybe my father had a hand in that decision. It is something I ask myself with fear. But whether my father sent him to his death or not, this was the day Abel Zuckermann died. This was the day Sturmbannfuhrer Bauer was able to put into operation his plan for the safety of his wife and son. This was the day he came to the house and told me to be strong and to look after my mother like a good soldier. This was the day he knelt down and tattooed my arm with a camp number, the best passport a child could have in the days that were coming. This was the day I became Leo Zuckermann. This was the day my mother, not Marthe Bauer any more, but Hannah Zuckermann, took me from Auschwitz and travelled west. Always away from the Russians, whom my mother feared above all else. We

138

would try to make sure we were picked up by the Americans or the British. Papa had promised my mother he would join us one day, when it was safe. He would find us somehow, and we would be a family once more. In fact, my mother believed, he always knew that he could never see us again. ‘All this I listen to while the rabbi and the friends wait outside. As my mother speaks, memories stir themselves awake and call to me like distant music. The memory of the pain from the tattoo needle. The memory of a pineapple. The memory of my father’s uniform. And then the memory of walking at night, walking for miles at night and crying. The memory of being denied food. The memory of my mother saying to me, over and over, “You must be thin, Leo! You must be thin!” ‘I tell her of this memory and ask if it means anything. ‘ “Poor boy,” she says. “It tore at my heart to starve you, but how could I have persuaded an official that we were refugees from a concentration camp if we looked plump and well fed?” ‘After a week of walking south and west, she told me, we joined up with some Jewish refugees who had escaped from one of the death marches.’ Leo broke off here and looked at me enquiringly. ‘You know about the death marches?’ ‘Er … not really,’ I said. ‘Oh, Michael! If you, a historian, do not know, then what hope is there?’ ‘Well, it’s not really my period, you see.’ Leo dipped his head in despair. ‘Well, I tell you then. Towards the end, the SS were absolutely determined that not one single Jew would be liberated by the onrush of the Allies. It was clear to them all that the war was lost, but no Jew would survive to see his freedom or tell the tale. As the Americans and British advanced from the west and the Soviets from the east, a huge army of camp

139

prisoners was evacuated from the camps and marched into the centre of Germany. The prisoners were beaten bloody, tortured, starved, murdered out of hand. Forced to travel miles on no greater daily ration than a single turnip. Hundreds of thousands died. These were the Todesmdrsche, the death marches. Now you know.’ ‘Now I know,’ I agreed. ‘So, one day, a week or so after leaving Auschwitz, my mother and I met up with a small group who had somehow managed to escape one of these marches. Three children and two men. Some others had left with them, but died on the way. They had come from almost the same place as us. From the camp at Birkenau, sometimes known as Auschwitz Two. We struggled west across the Czechoslovakian border together in a pitiful condition, travelling only by night, leaving the road by day and sleeping in ditches and under hedges. One of the men could only hop, he had an oedemic leg that began to stink of gangrene. One of the children died while walking with me. Just fell down dead without a sound. After a week we were picked up by Czechoslovakian communists. My mother and I were moved from one refugee centre to another, each bigger than the last. Finally, yielding to my mother’s incessant talk of her brother-in-law in New York City, we were sent further west to be processed by the Americans. A sergeant ruffled my hair and gave me a stick of chewing-gum, just like in the movies. He questioned us, noted down our tattoo numbers and issued us with travel and identity papers. In 1946 we finally received permission to cross the Atlantic and live with our Uncle Robert and his family in the Borough of Queens. ‘So. My father’s plan had worked perfectly. I grew up as an American Jew, with my American Jewish cousins, knowing nothing of my past beyond the stories I was told of my great and murdered father, the good doctor Abel Zuckermann of Krakow. You wonder that I accepted this story, perhaps? Surely I knew that this was a lie?’

140

‘I don’t know,’ I said. ‘I mean, you must have remembered some of your earlier life.’ ‘I don’t know. Maybe I did, maybe I erased it. I can’t remember now what I remembered then, if you see what I mean. How much of your life do you remember from before you were seven? Is it not just shadows with strange patches of light? Everything my mother told me I believed. Children do. Consider too the trauma of the days of starvation and walking and hiding, the bewilderment of being herded from place to place for endless months, the boredom and nausea of the ocean voyage. All these did much of my mother’s work for her. It was a year and a half after my arrival in America before I was capable of any real conversation. By the time I emerged from my silence I truly believed I was Leo Zuckermann. Nothing else would have made sense.’ ‘But your uncle? How could your mother convince him she was really his sister-in-law?’ ‘Robert had been parted from his brother for ten years. He had never met the real Hannah Zuckermann. Why should he doubt her? Oh, she had an explanation for everything, my mother. She even explained …’ Leo paused, his face momentarily screwed up in pain and embarrassment. ‘She even explained my penis.’ ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘She told Uncle Robert that the moil in Krakow had been rounded up by the Nazis in 1938 before my circumcision could be performed. It was done to me in New York within a week of my arrival there. That I will never forget. Circumcision, Hebrew classes, bar mitzvah, all those I remember with perfect clarity. And now, as she lay dying in front of my eyes, my mother decides to tell me that it has all been a lie, my whole life has been a lie. I am not a Jew. I am a German.’ ‘Wow.’ ‘Wow is as good a word as any other. Wow about covers it. I looked down on this woman, this Marthe Bauer from





Unknown




141

Miinster. Her face is as white as the pillow behind her and her eyes are burning with what I can only call pride. ‘ “So now you know, Axi,” she says to me. ‘The use of the name strikes me like a rock. Stirs muddy pools of memory. Axi … it rings a bell, as they say. ‘ “And my real father?” I ask her. “Sturmbannfiihrer Bauer. What of him?” ‘She shakes her head. “He was captured by the Poles and hanged. I found out. Eventually I found out. It took me years. I had to be careful, you see. At last I hit upon the idea of calling the Simon Wiesenthal Centre in Vienna and claiming that I had seen him in the street in New York. They say to me that it must have been someone else, since for sure Dietrich Bauer was tried and executed in ‘49. Then I know. But don’t worry, Axi,” she adds hastily, “I’m sure he died happy. Knowing that we were safe.” ‘ “Why have you never told me this before, Mutti?” I ask, keeping the horror from my voice. This is a dying woman. You cannot badger the dying. ‘ “One thing mattered only. Your safety. In this world it is better to be a Jew than a German, But I always wanted you to know one day what you really are. I have been a good mother to you. I protected you.” ‘Michael, I tell you, there was a kind of ferocity in her voice that terrified me. ‘ “You should not be ashamed of your father. He was a good man. A fine doctor. A kind man. He did what he could. No one understands now. The Jews were a threat. A real threat. Something had to be done, everyone thought so. Everyone. Maybe some people went too far. But the way they talk about us now, you would think we were all animals. We were not animals. We were people with families, with ideals, with feelings. I don’t want you to be ashamed, Axi. I want you to be proud.” ‘This is what she said to me. I sat with her for a while, her hand grasping mine. I could feel the grip of it weaken. At last she said, “Tell the others they may come in now. I am ready.”

142

‘I turned from the doorway and saw that she had taken up a Hebrew prayer book. I stood staring at her as her friends filed in past me and surrounded the bed, as is the Jewish custom. And that, Michael, is the last I saw of my other parent. So now you know.’ The coffee was cold in my cup. I looked at the bookcase at the row upon row of books. All on that subject. Leo followed my eyes. ‘Primo Levi’s book The Periodic Table is prefaced by a Yiddish saying,’ he said. ‘Ibergekumene tsores iz gut tsu dertseylin. “Troubles overcome are good to tell.” For him, for others, it may be that the troubles have been overcome. For me they will never be overcome. And they have not been good to tell. There is a stain of blood upon me that can never be washed away in this world. Maybe in another. So let us go, Michael, and create that other world.’ Making History 47° I3f N} 10° 52′ E FADE IN: EXT. MICHAEL ‘ S HOUSE - NIGHT Establishing shot of the Newnham house. All the lights are on. An owl hoots. A thumping, scrabbling SOUND is heard inside. CUT TO: INT. MICHAEL’S HOUSE, BEDROOM - NIGHT Inside the house MICHAEL is in the bedroom, looking under the bed. He talks to himself. MICHAEL Come on baby … I know you’re here somewhere . He moves to the wardrobe and opens it. It is empty. He searches on the floor. MICHAEL Come on! He slaps his thigh in frustration as he stands. He checks the top of the wardrobe. Nothing. He moves to the bathroom. CUT TO: INT. MICHAEL’S HOUSE, BATHROOM - NIGHT MICHAEL flings open the bathroom cabinet above the wash basin.

143

He has been rather too violent. All the contents of the cabinet tumble out. Shaving-cream, toothpaste, toothbrushes, tubes of ointment, bottles of pills. MICHAEL (yelling furiously) Arse! Pants! Double pants! He scrabbles all the things together and tries to cram them back in. This doesn’t work well. MICHAEL Panty arse-fuck! He snatches at a razor, cutting his hand as it closes around it. MICHAEL sucks at the blood, enraged. MICHAEL Jesus-ing bollock-pants . . . He stamps through to the kitchen muttering. MICHAEL Arsey pant-pant bollocky damn. CUT TO: INT. MICHAEL’S HOUSE, KITCHEN - NIGHT MICHAEL runs his hand under the tap and goes moodily to the central table. On the kitchen table his wallet lies open. The contents are spread out. Some money, credit cards, driving licence, scraps of paper. MICHAEL sits moodily at the table and goes through these items. He puts his fingers in the wallet and checks each corner of each compartment. MICHAEL (muttering to himself) Somewhere safe! That’s a joke He puts his head in his hands and rocks backwards and forwards in misery. MICHAEL (as Olivier in Marathon Man) Is it safe? Is it safe? (as Hoffman in the same film) Sure it’s safe. It’s so safe you wouldn’t believe . He howls at himself furiously. MICHAEL You moron. You arsehole. You couldn’t be trusted to keep

a . . .a … cold, could you? WHY? Why the fuck couldn’t I just . . . SUDDENLY, he raises his head . . . MICHAEL Hey! A smile grows. 144

MICHAEL Yeah . . . It becomes a beam. MICHAEL Why the fuck not? He stands up and runs to the study. INT. MICHAEL’S HOUSE, STUDY - NIGHT CUT TO: MICHAEL goes, not to his half of the study, but to Jane’s. There are the boxes still, neatly labelled, ready to be sent on. MICHAEL She won’t have remembered it. She won’t have remembered. She can’t have remembered . . . He opens the bottom drawer of Jane’s desk and feels towards the end. MICHAEL (mimicking Jane) ‘Always keep a spare’ . . . 1 always keep a spare’ . . . His hand finds something. MICHAEL Yes! His hand comes out bearing . . . A dusty CREDIT CARD. MICHAEL blows on it. CLOSE on the card. Not a credit card, but some sort of I.D. There is a photo of Jane on it, looking severe. MICHAEL kisses the card, and runs his finger along its magnetic strip. MICHAEL Bitch. Sow. Cow. Darling. Mwah! CUT TO: EXT. GENETICS LAB - NIGHT MICHAEL, in black polo-neck, black trousers and black gloves, leaps somewhat unconvincingly from bush to bush outside the laboratory. He gazes at the building. The lobby is lit, but there are no other discernible lights. MICHAEL looks at his wristwatch. MICHAEL Pants. He hops out from beh,ind a bush and walks towards the glass doors, more or less confidently.

145

We see beside the main door a security lock, with a slit for swiping cards. MICHAEL takes up the card, swallows twice and slides the card through. A red light turns to green and we hear a satisfying CLUNK. MICHAEL pushes open the door and goes in. CUT TO: INT. GENETICS LAB, LOBBY - NIGHT MICHAEL pads quietly across the lobby towards the lifts. He looks left towards a reception desk. There is no one there. Everything is eerily quiet. MICHAEL presses an elevator button and the doors sweep open. He swallows nervously, enters the lift and the doors close behind him. CUT TO: INT. GENETICS LAB, THIRD FLOOR - NIGHT A silent passageway, barely lit. PING! Light floods in as the elevator doors open and MICHAEL emerges, looking nervously left and right. He feels his way along the corridor until he comes to a door he knows . He peers at the security lock and slides down his card once more. Another satisfying clunk! He steps into the room and turns on the lights. MICHAEL All right . . . ! CUT TO: INT. GENETICS LABS, JANE’S LAB - NIGHT LIGHT flicks on from overhead fluorescent strips as MICHAEL steps into the centre of the room. He is on familiar ground here. He stares around for a moment, accustoming himself to the glare of the tube lighting. He moves forwards to the bench. MICHAEL Now. Where are you my beauties? Don’t say . He stares at a corner of the bench which is empty. His hand strokes the bare surface. MICHAEL No. No, that would be . . . stay calm, kid. Always calm.

146

He stands back, trying to keep a lid on his mounting fears. He looks at the bench, as do we . . . Deep sinks with rubber-hosed faucets. Electrical equipment. Centrifuges. Racks of test-tubes. Below and above the benches, there are cupboards, like in a fitted kitchen. MICHAEL takes a deep breath and goes to a cupboard. He pulls it open. CLOSE on MICHAEL’S face. We look at the cupboard . . . EMPTY MICHAEL Arse. He opens another cupboard . . . EMPTY MICHAEL Pants. And another . . . EMPTY MICHAEL Double-arse. Another . . . EMPTY MICHAEL Double-pants. Yet another . . . FULL. What was that? MICHAEL’S brows shoot up. Yes! Full! The cupboard is filled with large glass jars. One of them contains orange pills. We have seen these before. Scarcely able to breathe in case this is all a mirage, MICHAEL leans forward and takes up the glass jar of pills . He sets it down on the bench tenderly, opens it and takes out a handful of pills. He stares at them, breathes a deep sigh and begins to fill his pockets. CUT TO: INT. GENETICS LAB, GROUND FLOOR LOBBY -NIGHT The lift doors open and MICHAEL steps out. He crosses the lobby and is just about to open the door and leave when . A SOUND.

147

MICHAEL pricks his ears . We HEAR a strange muffled HOWLING. MICHAEL turns and looks down the corridor, frowning in puzzlement. Intrigued, MICHAEL pads along the corridor. The HOWLING sound grows. He stops outside a door. It is mostly wooden, but there is a vertical strip of glass. MICHAEL presses his eyes to it. From MICHAEL’ s POV we look in as well. Dimly lit, we make out CAGES. Inside the cages there are DOGS. The cutest puppies you’ve ever seen, nosing softly and sadly against their steel bars. MICHAEL (whispering) Hey there, pups! The HOWLING grows, the cages begin to rock. MICHAEL Sh! Hey guys . . . shush, okay? MICHAEL feels for his security card and swipes it through. He steps in. CUT TO: INT. GENETICS LABS, ANIMAL TESTING ROOM -NIGHT MICHAEL switches on the lights and surveys the room. All around him are cages filled with puppies . The whimpering, scrabbling and howling has grown to horrific proportions. MICHAEL (nervously) Hi there fellers . . . shush, now. The sound grows even louder. MICHAEL You puppies . . . me Pup. Glad to know you. More scrabbling and howling. MICHAEL Listen, I can’t set you free. You’re too young. You’d die. Believe me. It’d be cruel. I’m sorry. DIFFERENT ANGLES on the puppies . Somehow they begin to look almost sinister. Huge, malevolent. The noise swells, the cages rock. It looks as if the locks might give way.

148

MICHAEL backs away, scared. He leaves the room and shuts the door behind him. CUT TO: EXT. GENETICS LAB - NIGHT CUT TO: EXT . MADINGLEY ROAD - NIGHT MUSIC: MICHAEL is bicycling along at top speed. He leans round a corner and down the drive towards the Cavendish laboratories. He thrashes along to the car-park and to the front of the building, where LEO is waiting outside, carrying a portable computer bag and looking a little impatient. MICHAEL dismounts and lets his bicycle drop where it is. LEO Any later and we would have missed the satellite. Sorry . MICHAEL (panting) . I had to MICHAEL runs from the building, the howling of the puppies still echoing in his ears. LEO Never mind. You’re here. Let’s go. LEO turns to the door of the building. MICHAEL takes his briefcase from the rear of his fallen bike and follows. MICHAEL (under his breath) Jawohl, me in Hauptmann! Schnell, schnell! CUT TO: INT. SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS ROOM - NIGHT LEO has set up the machinery. TIM is plugged in. Cables and flat cords fan out from its rear. We notice that a dymoed label saying ‘T.I.M. ‘ has been fixed above the screen. MICHAEL I lost the pill. Can you believe it? I was sure I’d put it somewhere safe, but I’d lost the sucker. Had to go and get some more. That’s why I was late. LEO (concentrating on what he is doing) You lost it?

149

MICHAEL empties his pockets. There are at least thirty of the pills. MICHAEL It’s okay, I got all these now. Maybe it’s no bad thing. I mean would one have been enough? We don’t really know anything about these suckers, do we? LEO looks at the pills. LEO True. MICHAEL How many, do you reckon? LEO We’ll see. We cannot even be sure if Alois will drink. MICHAEL Sure he’ll drink. Think of his hangovers in the mornings. All he will want to do is drink gallons and gallons of water. LEO Such is our hope. Now, if you please. The coordinates. MICHAEL opens his briefcase and consults his notes. He calls out the coordinates. MICHAEL Forty-seven degrees, thirteen minutes, twenty-eight seconds north, ten degrees, fifty-two minutes, thirty-one seconds east. LEO goes to the satellite communications desk and inputs these figures as they are called out. We see the TV monitor picture from one of the satellites change its attitude and angle on the earth. A caption beneath reads: 47° 13′ 28″ N- 10° 52′ 31″ E LEO Check. LEO goes to TIM and takes a cable which he jacks into a socket that emerges from the satellite comms desk. LEO goes to TIM and switches it on. There is a small flash of light, but no image. LEO Now. The dates. MICHAEL We agreed on June 1888 . LEO All right. Let us say 1st June 1888.

150

MICHAEL In the morning. LEO Oh six hundred hours . . . LEO presses keys on TIM. He switches a switch. There is a hum as TIM’s screen comes to life. CLOSE on the screen. As before, colours swirling chaotically. A veined thread of dark purple runs through. MICHAEL Is that it? LEO That’s it. Brunau-am-Inn, Upper Austria, 1st June, 1888. MICHAEL Wow. LEO and MICHAEL look at each other. LEO takes four pills and goes to another part of the bench where there is a strange GREY METAL CANISTER with a glass lid. He lifts the lid and places the pills inside. He takes a cable from the canister and attaches it to the rear of TIM. MICHAEL swallows. MICHAEL Are you sure we want to do this? LEO stares at MICHAEL. LEO We don’t have time for a conversation. In ten minutes we lose the satellite. MICHAEL It’s just that . . . LEO What are you saying to me? We’ve discussed this over and over. It’s your idea for God’s sake! MICHAEL I know, I know. But suppose it goes wrong? LEO Suppose it goes wrong? Suppose it goes wrong? Michael, it has gone wrong. That is the point. He jabs a finger at the screen. LEO (CONT’D) Look! There! Look. The most evil force in world history is just ten months away from being unleashed. Misery, pain,

151

torture, death, despair, ruin, destruction . . . what else can I say? Language breaks down. And we can stop it. We CLOSE in on the screen and see the coloured lights as LEO talks. LEO (CONT’D) (over) This quiet little street is about to make Pandora’ s box look like Barbie’s jewel case. And we can do something about it! We don’t have to shoot a gun or throw a knife. No bomb, no poison, no pain. Just four little pills and the evil never happened. MICHAEL And you will be able to sleep at night. LEO (angry) You think that’s what this is all about? My conscience? Well . MICHAEL . it is, isn’t it? LEO So before . . . when you believed I was Jewish. It was all right then? I could seek revenge. But now. Now that you know I am German, the son of one of the beasts of Auschwitz, that makes a difference? It is noble to seek revenge, but not to make amends ? MICHAEL No, it’s not that. I just . . . LEO takes MICHAEL’S hand. LEO Pup, listen to me. In this life you are either a rat or a mouse. Nothing in between. But MICHAEL So who wants to be a rat? LEO You didn’t let me finish. The difference is that a rat does good or evil by changing things around him, by acting. The mouse does good or evil by doing nothing, by refusing to interfere. Which do you want to be? MICHAEL looks at the screen. At LEO’s face. At the pills in LEO’S hands. MICHAEL

152

(taking a deep breath) Hell. LEO smiles. MICHAEL returns the smile. MICHAEL (CONT’D) Be a rat and grab that mouse. LEO picks up the computer mouse that leads from TIM and the image on screen shifts. LEO There! The purple is the water. It is your well, no question. We see the purple thread running through the picture. There is a sudden movement in the background. MICHAEL Christ, what was that do you think? LEO Who knows? Maybe an animal. I am zooming further in to the well. Slowly the picture fills with purple. MICHAEL I don’t believe this . . . LEO takes his hand from the mouse. LEO You know what to do now. When I give the word. MUSIC begins to build. MICHAEL goes to the canister that contains the pills. There is a red button on its side. MICHAEL licks his lips and puts his thumb to the button. LEO meanwhile has his finger on a switch on TIM’s keyboard. The two of them look at each other. The MUSIC builds. CLOSE on MICHAEL. CLOSE on the pills in the canister. CLOSE on LEO. CLOSE on LEO’s fingers over the switching gear. CLOSE on MICHAEL’s thumb. LEO nods twice and . . . LEO NOW! MICHAEL’S thumb presses the button. We see inside the canister the four pills appear to light up and glow with light. They start to fade as …

153

LEO’s finger presses his switch. Inside the purple image on TIM’s screen the dim ghosts of four orange pills emerge and glow. The pills have disappeared from inside the canister. They have emerged in the well in Brunau. Suddenly, as MICHAEL watches : everything in the room begins to swirl and morph. The satellite monitors, the switching gear - even LEO himself - are all changing shape, all taking on swirling liquid form. As the MUSIC reaches its climax it is clear that everything around him is being gathered into a whirlpool. Matter, light, energy, everything is swirling into a great tornado of light and colour. The epicentre of that tornado is TIM’s screen. All matter, starting with small objects is morphed and swirled into it. MICHAEL watches as LEO disappears in front of his eyes, sucked inside the screen as if he were no more than a leaf being swept into a drain. A huge blinding implosion of light and colour and now MICHAEL too is swept from his feet and flies through the screen as if vdiving into an ocean of glowing mercury. Everything, the universe itself it seems, is instantaneously sucked through TIM which now seems to turn itself out and be sucked into itself leaving only . . . BLACKOUT Local History Henry Hall ‘Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to Projectile City …’ ‘Owl’ - ‘Hey, I said “lean your head up on the wall,” not “bang it violently,” dummy.’ ‘Gross, totally gross …’ ‘Oh man, that is a chuck ‘Heck’s sake, I got some on my shoe …’ ‘His head okay?’ ‘No blood, but he’s gonna feel a bump in the morning.’

154

‘Someone take his arm ‘No way am I going anywhere near …’ ‘Why does he do this every darned time! I mean, Jesus ‘Shoulda seen him last commencement …’ ‘We don’t get a move on, we’re gonna miss the shuttle.’ ‘I think he’s done.’ ‘Oh …’ ‘Hey! It speaks ‘Where the bloody hell am I? ‘It speaks strangely …’ ‘Don’t jerk around, Mikey. We gotta move.’ ‘How about we grab a Whopper?’ ‘Oh …’ ‘Todd. Not a good idea …’ ‘Oh Lord … he’s down again.’ ‘My legs don’t seem to work.’ ‘No shit, Sherlock …’ ‘What is it with you Mikey? I mean, heck’s sake, you didn’t drink any more ‘an the rest of us …’ Dimly aware through swirling mists of alcohol that we are passing a Burger King. A strange Burger King. And a book shop, A strange book shop. Never seen it before. Over the road a college gate. Trinity? Not Trinity. St John’s? No. Where then? Something not right with those cars. It’s not just that they swim and wobble like jellyfish. It’s not just that their headlights stab my eyeballs. There’s something else I’ll work it out in a minute. Meanwhile, concentrate on walking. See? It’s not so hard … Try a little straighter. My God, it’s so humid … Who are these people anyway? Who are those guys? You’re the one with the ideas, Butch. That’s it, focus on what we know. Make sure we’re not totally gone. Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, 1969, George Roy Hill. Four fours are sixteen.

155

The Battle of Agincourt, 1415. The capital of Corsica is Ajaccio.

Q: Can you tell me Napoleon’s nationality? A: Course I can! The sun is ninety-three million miles from the earth. Give or take. L P Hartley’s middle name was Poles. The past is a foreign country, they do things differently there. Okay, so no brain damage. Drunk, though. Well slammed. No doubt about that. And woozy from a bang on the head. Just go with it, son. Someone’s holding me up so tightly it’s tugging at the skin of my underarm. Hey! What a sweet little bus! What the hell is the driver doing over there? Maybe I’ll try and sleep a little. Mm … ‘Wake up, vodka boy …’ ‘Henry Hall …’ ‘Henry Hall? Who’s Henry HallY ‘Let’s just leave him here in the lobby, whadda you say? ‘Grow up, Williams.’ ‘It’s okay, I’ll get him to his room …’ ‘You’re a hero, Steve.’ ‘Seriously though, where am I? ‘Oh boy. Just follow me, man, I’m right behind you. Night fellers.’ ‘Night, Steve.’ ‘You think he’s okay?’ ‘He’ll be fine, I’ll make sure.’ ‘What is this placer’ ‘Home sweet home, Mikey. Here we go … one step at a time.’ ‘Where the others go? 156

‘The others have gone to their beds. Now, you must go to yours. Then I can go to mine. Which would be good. Key, please …’ ‘Huh? Key? ‘Mm-hm. Key.’ ‘What key? ‘Please don’t fool around, Mikey. I really need your key.’ ‘My key? Mikey? Who’s Mikey? Who’s my key? ‘Where is it?’ ‘Key? I don’t have a key.’ ‘Sure you do ‘No key.’ ‘Yes key. Mikey, we’re gonna wake someone up any minute.’ ‘Hey! What are you doing? ‘It’s nothing personal, Mikey. I just need to find ‘Get your hands out of my pockets, will you? I’m telling you, I don’t have …’.’ ‘Okay. So what’s this, a lucky charm?’ ‘I’ve never seen that before in my life.’ ‘You are seriously weird, you know that Mikey? Are you sure you’re okay? Alrighty. In we go … On the bed where nice Mr Sandman is waiting to take you away. Far away to the land of dreams where everybody is happy and eats cherry pie.’ ‘Whose room is this? ‘Lie down, don’t talk. It’s okay. I’m not gonna undress you.’ ‘I mean, what is going on? ‘I just need to make sure you’re not gonna puke up and drown, that’s all. Look at me Mikey. You’re not gonna do any more puking, are you?’ ‘ Who are you? ‘Just answer me. Do you need to puke?’ ‘No. Don’t need to puke …” ‘Okay. That’s good. Your keys and your money are on the table here ‘So hot …’

157

‘Hoo, I wouldn’t want your head in the morning.’ ‘Nice bed. Comfy.’ ‘Sure. It’s comfy. Real comfy. I’m gonna switch the lights off now.’ ‘Night night … what do I call you? What’s your name)’ ‘Oh boy …’ ‘Are you by any chance American)’ ‘Sheesh … Sleep tight, Mikey. Don’t let the bugs bite.’ Oh Jesus Pants. I thought I never got hangovers. This is a screamer. Think I may just lie here a while. Let the tongue work free of the palate. Tp-tp-tp. Tp-tp-tp. Work up a little spittle. Oily-Moily’s dirtiest number. A little spittle It’ll Do the trick. Hm. Water. Try opening the eyes. Just a little way. You can do it. Oh boy … It’s like when you were young and you used to take the cellophane wrapper from a Quality Street toffee and hold it over your eyes, giggling and chasing your saffroncoloured mother around the kitchen. ‘Uer … you’re all yellow, Mummy.’ It’s not just that everything’s a sick egg-yolk colour, there’s another problem. The room is … Hold on, this can’t be right. It just can’t be right. Make a list. Put down what you know. In outline form, one side of your brain only. usinc A room, containing: - a table, containing: -

 a bunch of keys  a packet of Lucky Strike cigarettes  a train ticket that says: -New Jersey Transit Co. 158

 a wallet  a mobile phone  a botde of Evian, containing: -Evian water (I assume)  a clock that says: -09:12 a bed, containing: -  my body, wearing: -strange clothes -a bump on its head  my mmd, feeling: -sick -weird -confused -frightened windows, containing: -  blinds (shut) a desk, containing: -  a computer -off  books  a telephone  papers a door (half open), leading to: -  a bathroom walls, on which hang: -  posters of -bands I don’t know -a baseball team -cute pop stars (M & F)  a black and orange flag a wardrobe, containing: -  clothes (half-glimpsed), belonging to: _ r> another door (closed), leading to: - Nice inventory. What does it tell us? It tells us we have a hangover. It tells us we are somewhere strange. It tells us there is weirdness afoot. 159

But we don’t panic. We try to relax the mind open, like a constipated man easing a reluctant sphincter. Mm, cute image, Mikey. Mikey? Relax. Get used to this light. Water. That’s better. A little flower of memory blooms in the brain. Me, vomiting in a garden. No, not a garden, a square. A small town square. A Burger King that didn’t look like a Burger King. A book shop. Some cars behaving strangely. Strangely? How, strangely’? We’ll come back to that. More water. A bus. A cute little bus. Someone saying ‘Henry Hall’. Yes, that’s right, Henry Hall. Now carefully, lad. Reassemble the thoughts. Remember them. One step at a time. One step at a time … someone said that. Last night, if it was last night, someone said, ‘One step at a time.’ I’m sure of it. Steve … I’m getting the name Steve. It’s hard to pierce the veil, dear. But I am getting a call from someone called Steve. Is there a recently passed over loved one in your life by that name? He wants you to know that he’s very happy, at peace now. I’m still getting that other name too. Mikey. They kept calling me Mikey? Why? No one calls me Mikey. Ever. I feel for the bump on my head and - Jesus … That’s another thing. Some arsehole’s been and cut my hair! My beautiful hair … It was never like, hippie long, but it flowed, you know? It happened. And now it’s all squashy and dead. Shit, I’d better get up.

160

I’d better get up and do … … what’? We.will leave me lying there for the moment, reassembling myself. I am not entirely sure that I am telling this story the right way round. I have said that it is like a circle, approachable from any point. It is also, like a circle, inapproachable from any point. I came up with those very words at the very beginning of the circle. If circles have beginnings. Now I have to say them again. As a historian, I said before, I should be able to offer a good, plain account of the events that took place on the … well, when did they take place? It is all highly debatable. The puzzle that besets me is best expressed by the following statements.

A: None of what follows ever happened B: All of what follows is entirely true So here I lie, wondering like Keats, Was it a vision, or a waking dream? Fled is that music, do I wake or sleep? Wondering too, why the Christ Jane isn’t coiled warmly beside me. No, not wondering that. I know the answer there. She’s left me. That I know. That much I do know. She’s outta there. She’s history. Wondering then, where the hell I am. In the centre of my brain there is a dark well. I keep trying to lower buckets into it, buckets of words, images and associations that might bring something familiar to the top, some clear cool splash of memory. Maybe if I prime the pump everything will spew to the surface in a great fountain. See, I know that there is something to know, that’s what’s galling me. Something to remember. Something momentous. But what? Memory is a salmon. The tighter you grip, the further it leaps away. That’s a familiar image too. I must get up. Everything will come back to me when I am standing. 161

Woah! The head may ache, the gut tremble, the legs wobble, the throat sting, but we are uply up. I haven’t vomited for years and I don’t like the feeling. No. That’s not right. I have thrown up recently. Over a toilet bowl, with a long string of gob hanging down and stuck to the back of my throat … was that last night? It was recent. It’ll come to me. Meanwhile … I look down at myself and ask, what the. hey is going on rig-wise? I don’t recognise these shorts or this T-shirt. I’m sorry, but I just do not. I mean, I would never wear anything so … I don’t know, so clean, I suppose. Chino cotton shorts? I could swear they have even been ironed, for all the dried flecks of spew upon them. And a polo shirt … a polo shirt of sea island cotton, for God’s sake. With a kind of gold embroidered logo on the left tit. I grab the side of the shirt to get a better look. An elephant I think, it’s hard to tell upside down, an elephant in a sort of sling. The type of sling you use with a crane for swinging livestock from ship to shore. I mean, what kind of dead-beat geek wears ironed chino shorts and sea island cotton polo shirts decorated with embroidered fucking elephants? The footwear I can relate to. Your bog-standard sloppy- heeled Timberland docksiders. Not mine though, for all they fit like a … well, you know. Just so happens that I’m not a Timberland user. I’m a Sebago baby. No real reason, just that I always have been. I think. It’s time to stand at the window, open the blinds and remind myself where I’ve ended up and why. I’ve never been very good with Venetian blinds. I always forget whether to pull the cord or to twist the handle. On this occasion I do both and the bottom right side of the blind rises to half-way and then jams there, slats provokingly closed. I bend down to peer through the small clear triangle of window. Wooh … I don’t get this at all.

162

A long, low building dead ahead. Ivy growing up the side of mullioned windows. St John’s College perhaps? Did I stay the night at St John’s? I turn, almost laughing to myself. It’s so comical I’ve just got to roll with it. Wait a minute … you’ve gotta roll with it … The phrase triggers the memory of a joke. Man: Waiter, that soup I just had … Waiter: What about it, sir? Man: Well, on the menu it said ‘Oasis Soup’. But it tasted to me like a perfectly ordinary tomato soup. Waiter: That’s right, sir. Perfectly ordinary tomato soup, sir. Man: Then why is it called Oasis Soup? Waiter: Because (singing) ‘You gotta roll with it Der-dan, der-dan … tishl Way-hey! And Oasis reminds me of something important. Something to do with Jane. But Jane’s gone … I think. No, it was something she said. Something … oh, pants to it. I’d better go find my way home and sleep this one off. ‘Find my way home’ - simpler, finer words were never written. The Odyssey, The Incredible Journey, Star Trek: Voyager. In the end, it all comes down to finding your way home. I took a shower - a good shower, I’ll give it that, a really fine shower, probably, when it came down to it, the best shower I’d ever had in my life, a real hot, hissy, wide- angled downpour that fell upon my shoulders like scalding rain. Under that shower I nearly fainted. I felt shitty from a hangover and a banged head, that is true. But you know, somehow I felt good too. Looked good. I ran a finger round my pecs and thought maybe I was turning into a bit of a hunk at last. I looked down at my legs and that was when I nearly fainted. You would have fainted too.

163

I exchanged the chino shorts and the polo shirt for … another polo shirt and another pair of chino shorts, for it was hot - even this early in the day and after a shower it was steamy hot with no plain T-shirts to be found - and opened the door, after one more lingering backward look of puzzlement and dread. I found myself, not in the corridor I expected, but in another room. Bookshelves filled with books, some sort of strange computer, more posters of unfamiliar models, musicians and sports stars, a small fridge, a window-seat set beneath a sham Gothic window … everything alien. I hardly paused before walking towards another door. Here was a corridor, not unlike that of a hotel, but brighter and wider; scruffier but at the same time grander. Less obsessively vacuumed, polished and waxed; but of a richer, more solid build - endowed with something of a sheen. The door facing me as I came out into this corridor was numbered 300 and beneath the number I saw a brass plaque, holding a card on which was calligraphed ‘Don Costello’. I turned to look at the door I was closing, the door of the room from which I had emerged. 303 iffltdjael M looting I started to run, sweat already breaking out under my arms and sliding down my sides. I passed other rooms, some with doors flung open, their occupants sitting on beds pulling on thick white socks or padding to and fro with towels around their waists. I reached a glazed door at the end of the corridor, threw it open and hurled myself towards a wide staircase of shining pine. The heat, the unfamiliar smells, the high glass windows, the creak of the wood, they contrived to squeeze together and leak out in my mind like fisted clay oozing through closed fingers. I felt the clammy prickle of the nightmare of the first day at a new school. That dismaying sense of wide-angled dread. The realisation that the proportions and dimensions of the places you see now will quickly be

164

remapped in your brain and that soon the perspectives, angles and eye-lines will shrink. You will be able, standing in a hallway, to summon up an image of how that passageway first appeared to you before it became safe and known, and you will marvel that it was ever cast in such frightening lines. Yet all the time, tugging you down like lead, the knowledge that this familiarisation is really a corruption, a loss. The humidity, however … I could never accustom myself to that. At its heart a metallic savour that hinted at far-off storms boiling over the horizon. Half-way down the stairs, I heard the squeak of trainers on wood and the spank of palm on banisters as someone threw themselves upwards. Whoever this is, I said to myself, I shall ask them as calmly as I can. I looked down and saw a flop of light hair bouncing up towards me. ‘Excuse me,’ I said, ‘I wonder if …’ ‘Yay, it’s alive!’ ‘Urn …’ ‘So, how’s it going?’ ‘I …’ He clapped a hand on my shoulder, blue, concerned eyes scanning my own. ‘Woah, you’re still looking rough. Gosh you were gone last night. I, er, I just came over to check you out.’ ‘Er … where am I exactly?’ ‘Right! Sure! I think maybe we’d better hit the Tower for a coffee.’ We descended the staircase. It was the boy from the night before, that much I was sure of. ‘It’s Steve, isn’t it?’ ‘Hey, come on, Mikey, cut it out, okay? Still not funny. Hoo! Pretty much got a head myself.’ ‘Where are we going?’ ‘Like I said, the Tower … no, second thought, state you’re in, better make it PJ’s. Get some air blowing around you.’

165

I followed him down to a door at the bottom of the stairs, on which he leaned for a second, regarding me through half-closed eyes and shaking his head sorrowfully as a schoolmaster looks at the one boy in the class he knows will come to no good. There was a puzzled look too, a puzzled almost hopeful look that I did not understand. Not until later - much, much later - did I understand that look. ‘Ay-yi-yi He sighed and pushed the door open. Warm air buffeted against my face in a moist, tropical wave. Striking with a greater force, a force that took away all breath and all hope of sanity was the vision laid out before me of a huge courtyard, a huge series of courtyards. Collegiate towers, gatehouses, lawns, vaulted passageways, quadrangles and statuary stretched in every direction. It was as if St Matthew’s had developed cancer and erupted with extravagant mutated growths, lush and demented variations on a Cambridge theme. I stood frozen, my legs braced like a child. ‘What’s the problem?’ ‘I … I …’ ‘Heck, something’s really bugging you, isn’t it?’

I nodded dumbly. ‘Cm here,’ said Steve. ‘Look at me. Look at me He peered anxiously into my eyes. I stared back, frightened as hell.

‘Maybe you’re concussed. Your pupils are okay, I guess. I don’t even know what the hell concussion is supposed to do to them. Let’s go.’ I walked alongside in a kind of dream. Above me fake Jacobean bell towers, mock medieval castellations and incongruously handsome gargoyles loomed down; beneath my feet cobbled pathways set in rose tarmac led us through the heart of this huge and magnificent village. The word provoked a vision in me of Patrick McGoohan, The Prisoner, waking up in his little room in The Village. The camera zooming with period mania from ping-pong

166

ball springing fountains to green copper cupolas; from miniature domed palaces to sneering stone cherubs. -Where am I? -The Village. -Who are you? -I am Number Two. -Who is Number One? -YOU are Number Six. -I am not a number, I’m a FREE MAN. We walked, Steve’s arm through mine, into a gatehouse, ancient in style but solid and clean and new, and emerged onto a street, busy with traffic. It took a second for the point to sink home. ‘Jesus,’ I said. ‘The cars …’ ‘Hey, c’mon, Mikey. Calm down, will you? There’s nothing to worry about. We’ll cross the street further down.’ ‘But where are we) This isn’t England!’ ‘Oh God, Mike.’ I looked at him, trembling and afraid, and saw my fear reflected in his face. Tears sprang into my eyes. ‘I’m sorry … I’m sorry! But I really don’t know what’s going on. Why do you know me when I don’t know you? And the traffic. It’s driving on the right-hand side of the road. Where are we? Please, where are we?’ He stood in front of me, a hand on each of my shoulders, and I could sense him fighting down his own panic and a desire, as people passed by staring, to be miles away from such a howling mess. He spoke to me in a raised voice, as you talk to the deaf, the foreign and the insane. ‘Mike, it’s okay. I think you bumped your head last night and I think maybe it’s screwed up your memory. You’re talking a little crazy, but it’s okay. Look at me. Come on, look at me, Mikey!’ My voice shook in a treble whine. ‘But where am I? Please! I don’t understand where I am.’ ‘I’m gonna take you to see a doctor now, Mikey. So just come along with me, ‘kay? Everything’s fine. You’re

167

in Princeton, where you should be, and there’s nothing to get hot under the collar about, okay?’ Military History The Frenchman and the Colonel’s Helmet: II ‘It’s hot. It’s boiling hot and still they insist we wear these tunics.’ Hans Mend scuffed his boots along the duckboards in the direction of the forward trench, loudly and breezily damning the generals. Ernst Schmidt beside him remained as resolutely silent as usual, offering as comment only the occasional wheeze from his gas- injured lungs. ‘Mind you,’ said Hans. ‘Even if someone did explode a howitzer up their arses they would probably manage to claim it as a tactical victory. And another thing,’ he went on, after leaving a polite pause for comment, a pause he knew would go unfilled. ‘Franzmann and that twice- damned helmet. Something must be done. Our Franconian puppies need to be led by example. They should be shown that we Bavarians do not take this kind of insult lying down. A revenge must be exacted. A lesson must be taught.’ ‘Talk is easy,’ said Schmidt. Hans dug Ernst cheerfully in the ribs. ‘Then you should try it more often! Hey? Hah!’ ‘It achieves nothing.’ ‘On the contrary, it passes the time, exercises the lungs and sharpens the mind.’ ‘It’s talk that is losing us this war.’ ‘For God’s sake, Ernst!’ Hans looked about him nervously. ‘We’re not losing this war. Militarily we are doing well, we have a clear advantage, everyone knows that. It is only on the home front that we are losing. Morale is being fucked by the Bolsheviks, the pacifists and the artist queers.’ ‘Someone being fucked by artist queers?’ A cheerful voice behind them. ‘Not another Prussian scandal, surely? That’s all we need.’ Rudi Gloder came up between them and clapped a hand to the shoulder of each.

168

Hans and Ernst snapped to a salute. ‘Herr Haupt-mann!’ ‘Cut that out,’ said Rudi with a shy smile. ‘Only salute when other officers are watching. So tell me, what is this talk of artist queers?’ ‘Morale, sir,’ said Hans. ‘I was saying to Schmidt how morale is being undermined back home.’ ‘Hm. Good choice of word. The enemy at home is using the same techniques as the enemy in France. Sapping and undermining are all any of us do in this war. The arts of twentieth century battle are not something our dear leaders understand. Fortunately, our foemen understand them even less.’ Foemen! Hans thought there was something boyishly earnest and entirely loveable in Rudi’s typical and

apparently self-contradictory introduction of an antiquated Wagnerian word like ‘foemen’ into a conversation about modern warfare.

‘Those swinish Franzmdnner understand it all right,’ said Ernst gloomily. Rudi cocked an eyebrow. ‘How so?’ ‘I think he’s referring to the Frenchman and the Colonel’s Helmet.’ ‘The Frenchman and the Colonel’s Helmet?’ said Rudi. ‘Sounds like the title of a cheap farce.’ ‘You won’t have heard about it yet, sir,’ said Hans. ‘You messengers always get the news fresh. We lowly trench rats have to digest it after it’s been chewed and spat out all down the line.’ ‘Well, sir, what happened was this. One of the men watching the enemy trenches this morning saw Colonel Baligand’s Pickelhaube, his best Imperial lobster-tail, being waved triumphantly backwards and forwards on the end of a rifle. They must have captured it in the raid on Thursday.’ ‘French bastards,’ said Rudi. ‘Arrogant pigs!’ ‘Do you think we could devise some way of getting it back, sir? For morale?’

169

‘We must! It is a question of the pride of the regiment. We must retrieve it and return with a trophy of our own. These piss-blooded children of the Sixth have to be shown how real men fight.’ ‘Yes, sir. But Major Eckert would never consent to any direct action for such a purpose.’ Rudi rubbed his chin. ‘You may be right about that. Major Eckert is, when all’s said and done, a Franconian. This needs thinking about. Where was this cocky Monsieur?’ ‘Just to the north of their new battery position,’ said Hans, pointing. ‘Sector K.’ ‘Sector K? Those were our trenches once, weren’t they? We dug the bastards ourselves four years ago. I’ve half a mind … Schmidt, what the helfc’ Hans stared in disbelief at the sight of Ernst grabbing hold of Rudi’s arm and tugging on it. ‘Sir, I know what you’re thinking and it is out of the question!’ said Ernst. ‘How dare you assume any such thing?’ ‘Sir, you must not. Really, you must not!’ Rudi removed the hand calmly, something, it seemed to Hans, between annoyance and amusement creasing the eternal smoothness of his brow. ‘Ernst,’ he said, ‘how well named you are!’ ‘Certainly, Herr Hauptmannl’ said Ernst, unrelenting. ‘And I must assure you … ich meine is mit bitterem Ernst.’ Rudi smiled and sang softly, ‘Ernst, Ernst, mein Ernst! hnmir so ernsthaft ernst!’ ‘Forgive me, sir, but I know just what you were considering. And it won’t do, sir, really it won’t.’ ‘How could you possibly know?’ ‘I know, I just know. I know your courage, sir. But it is too dangerous. We could easily afford to lose a colonel’s helmet, twenty helmets, twenty colonels even, but …’ Ernst’s coarse face reddened and thickened with emotion and Hans saw tears in his eyes, ‘… we could never afford to lose you.’

170

Hans did not believe he had ever in all his life seen such naked and unashamed hero-worship. No, damn it, such love. Comradeliness was the hearth-side of the trenches; unless the men warmed themselves in the glow of some sort of mutual companionship, they could never endure the soul’s winter of warfare. That was the agonising paradox of their lives here: without friendship you could not continue, yet every day friends must die. Make someone the crutch of your existence and their death leaves you weaker than ever you were before. So it was that affection went unstated and the death of friends was shrugged off with black jokes. It was astounding to Hans that Ernst, Ernst Schmidt of all people, should, changing metaphors, strip off his mask and risk the full force of the gas. God knew, they all loved Rudi. God knew, his was the one death they would never easily laugh off. Rudi, however, could laugh anything off. His arm was around Ernst now and he smiled down, his eyes warm with affection. ‘My dear old friend,’ he said, ‘would you have me two miles back with the generals? Sitting in armchairs and smoking on a pipe? I am a warrior. You must know by now that no harm will ever come to me. I have bathed in the dragon’s blood.’ Somehow, it seemed to Hans, such language in Rudi’s mouth never sounded as ridiculous as it should. If I were to talk like that, he thought, a bar of soap would be hurled at me and I should be ragged to the end of time. But Rudi, Rudi belongs in a stained-glass window, radiant in silver armour and flanked by holy knights and shining heroes. My God, listen to me! Hans pushed the nails of his ringers deep into his palms to stop himself from laughing aloud. Ernst meanwhile, caught up in a coughing fit, was still managing to be … ernst. ‘Promise me, sir. Promise me!’ he said, whooping like a seal.

171

‘I never make promises I cannot keep,’ said Rudi. ‘But have no fear. I shall be here safe and sound tomorrow morning. That I do swear, my faithful one. And don’t get yourself so excited! You should have stayed on sick leave longer, you know. Your lungs are still recovering.’ ‘I am as fit as any man here,’ protested Ernst. ‘I think maybe I should recommend you for another leave.’ ‘No, sir! I beg you do not.’ ‘Well then, for lighter duties perhaps ‘It’s just a cold, nothing more! I am fighting fit.’ ‘That’s right, old friend,’ said Rudi, soothingly. ‘Of course you are. Fit for anything.’ The contrast between the two men struck Hans as absurd. Rudi, golden and glowing with health and Ernst, hacking and coughing, coarse-featured and a head shorter. Rudi turned to Hans. ‘Look after him for me, will you? See he keeps out of danger.’ He strolled away singing Wagner while Ernst gazed pathetically after him, wheezing like an old hound. The pure sound of Rudi’s natural Heldentenor sprang up the shining intervals of the Siegfried motiv like a stag leaping up a mountain and filled Hans’s ears with a music of swords and spears and steeds that shamed the distant boom of vulgar guns. There’s a moment to take to my grave, he thought to himself. Then he slapped his leg in annoyance. Hans Mend, you are growing too sentimental, far too attached. Just like old Ernst here. After all, Rudi might be dead in five minutes. Don’t lean on a blade of grass. Well, he said to himself, perhaps there’s no harm m sentiment, honest German sentiment. But how I wish Rudi had resisted the urge to tease Ernst like that. Knowing Ernst it’s possible he might be provoked into doing something foolish … Hans shook his head and dismissed the thought from his mind.

172

He was swirling out the lees of his first foul mug of ersatz coffee the next morning when Ignaz Westenkirch-ner came up to him, shaking his head morosely. ‘Bad business, Mend. Bad business.’ ‘What is?’ ‘Oh dear, you haven’t heard then?’ Hans stifled a snort of impatience. He hated anyone to toy with him by releasing news slowly. Intelligence being worth more than chocolate at the front, almost all men relished the telling of it, but Westenkirchner was the worst. Like a bitchy little chorus girl, he would eke out his trivial gossip as though it were a brandy ration. Hans stared squarely down at his knees. ‘No, I haven’t heard,’ he said. ‘And I’m almost certain I don’t want to. I dare say I’ll know soon enough, whatever it is. He felt Westenkirchner’s hand on his shoulder. ‘I’m sorry, Hans. I assumed you’d been told …’ Hans stood, his stomach throbbing with a sudden oscillation of fear. ‘What is it?’ Ignaz put a pair of field-glasses gently into his hands and pointed towards no man’s land. ‘See for yourself, old man,’ he said. Hans climbed the nearest trench ladder, easing his head slowly above the parapet line. If Ignaz is pulling my leg, he muttered to himself, I’ll tear off his balls and load them up the breech of a gun. ‘Nine o’clock! It’s to the right of that crater. There!’ ‘Where?’ ‘There! Surely you can see?’ And quite suddenly, Hans did see. Ernst lay face down, his back torn open and glistening like blackberries, his outflung fist clutched tightly around the strap of Colonel Maximilian Bali-gand’s grand Imperial lobster-tailed Pickelhaube. Just out of his reach, as if his dying act had been to fling it towards his home lines, was a French officer’s sabre, sheathed in a silver scabbard.

173

Sick with loathing and anger Hans stared. He knew it. He just knew Ernst would try something like this. ‘Fool!’ he yelled. ‘Shithead fool. Why for this? Why!’ ‘Steady on,’ said Ignaz below him. ‘Nothing to be done.’ A movement in the foreground caught Hans’s attention. Slowly, centimetre by centimetre, from the direction of the German lines, a man was crawling on his stomach towards the body. ‘My God,’ whispered Hans. ‘It’s Rudi!’ ‘Where?’ Ignaz grabbed the field-glasses. ‘Sweet Maria! He’s insane. He’ll be killed. What can we do?’ ‘Do? Do? Nothing, you fool. Any action on our part will only draw attention to him. Get your bloody head down, we’ll use periscopes.’ For twenty minutes they watched, in silent prayer, as Rudi wormed his way towards the wire. ‘Careful, Rudi!’ Hans breathed to himself. ‘You can do it.’ Rudi edged his way along the main roll of wire between him and Ernst’s corpse until he came to a section marked with tiny fragments of cloth. This doorway safely negotiated he resumed his belly-down journey towards the body. Once he had got there- ‘And what in hell does he do now?’ whined Ignaz. ‘I mean, my God, that’s the easy part.’ ‘Smoke!’ said Hans. ‘Now he’s there, we can put up smoke between him and the enemy lines. Quick!’ Ignaz tumbled down from the ladder and hurled himself into the nearest dug-out screaming for smoke pistols while Hans continued to watch. Rudi lay there as motionless as the corpse beside him. ‘What’s he doing? He’s frozen up!’ Hans became aware of a gathering commotion in his own trench. He pulled back from the trench periscope and looked about him. Ignaz’s alarm had alerted dozens of men. No, not men. Boys, most of them. A few had periscopes themselves and were relaying, in fatuous





Unknown




174

commentary, every detail of the scene. The others turned their big, frightened eyes on Hans. ‘Why isn’t he moving? He’s frozen. Has he lost his nerve?’ The sight of a man freezing up in no man’s land was a common one. One minute you were running and dodging, the next you were stiff as a statue. ‘Not Rudi,’ said Hans with a confidence he did not necessarily feel. ‘He’s recovering his strength for the homeward run, that’s all.’ He turned back to the periscope. Still no movement. ‘Everyone with a smoke pistol, get ready!’ Half a dozen men crept to the top of ladders, their pistols cocked back over their shoulders, cowboy fashion. Hans wetted his finger and checked the wind before settling back to watch. Suddenly, with no warning, Rudi was up, facing the enemy. He hooked his arms under Ernst’s and pulled him backwards towards the German lines, hopping backwards with bent knees like a Cossack dancer. ‘Now!’ shouted Hans. ‘Fire! Fire high and five minutes to the left!’ The smoke pistols clapped a polite round of applause. Hans watched Rudi as the bombs fell beyond him and a dense curtain of smoke rose and thickened, drifting gently in the wind between him and the French forward trenches. Rudi turned briefly for a second and waved a salute towards his home lines. Did he know the smoke would come? Hans wondered. Did he trust that we would know what to do? No, he would have risked it anyway. Rudi felt responsible for Ernst’s death and was fully prepared to lay down his life to atone. What magnificent idiocy. ‘What the hell is going on here?’ Major Eckert had stamped into the trench, moustache quivering. Who gave orders to send up smoke?’ A young Franconian saluted smartly. ‘It’s Haupt-mann Gloder, sir.’ ‘Hauptmann Gloder? Why would he issue such an order?’

175

‘No, sir, he didn’t order it, sir. He’s out there, sir. In Niemandsland. Recovering Stabsgefreiter Schmidt’s body, sir.’ ‘Schmidt? Stabsgefreiter Schmidt dead? How? What?’ ‘He went out last night to rescue Colonel Baligand’s helmet, sir.’ ‘Colonel Baligand’s helmet? Are you drunk, man?’ ‘No, Herr Major. The French must have taken it during Thursday’s raid up the line, sir. Schmidt went to rescue it. He did too, and what’s more he brought back a sword as well. But then a shell must have got him, sir. Or a mine.’ ‘Good heavens!’ ‘Sir, yes sir. And Hauptmann Gloder is out rescuing the body now sir. Stabsgefreiter Mend ordered us to protect him with smoke.’ ‘Is this true, Mend?’ Mend stood to attention. ‘Quite true, sir. I believed it to be the best course.’ ‘But damn it, the French might be led into the belief that we are attacking.’ ‘Respectfully, Herr Major, that can do little harm. All that will happen is that Franzmann will waste a few thousand valuable rounds.’ ‘Well, it’s all very irregular.’ Not as irregular as you, you shithead schoolmaster, thought Mend. ‘And where’s the Hauptmann now?’ Westenkirchner bellowed the answer from behind his field-glasses. ‘He’s at the wire sir! Sir, he’s all right sir! He’s found the doorway. He’s got the body. And the helmet, sir! He’s got the helmet and the sword!’ A great roar of delight went up from the men and even Major Eckert allowed himself a smile. Hans watched as Rudi gently laid Ernst’s corpse into the upstretched hands of the men in the trenches below. Rudi made his own way down, shaking off the cheers and congratulations of the men, stunning them into silence with the immensity of his sorrow. He approached the

176

body as if he were alone with it, in some private chapel miles from the war. The helmet and sword in his hands as he knelt, Tarnhelm and Nothung, reinforced the magnificent Wagnerian absurdity of the scene. Distant crumps of artillery served the office of muffled drums and the returning billows of smoke wreathed the trench in funereal incense. Rudi laid the sabre and helmet tenderly on Ernst’s chest, his face wet with tears. Hans wept too, hot rolling tears of grief and pride and love. Rudi crossed himself, stood to attention, saluted the corpse and walked away, pushing past rows of white- faced boys. Suddenly Hans knew something with absolute clarity and conviction. It is impossible, he realised with a burst of pride, for Germany to lose the war. If the enemy could see what I have seen they would surrender tomorrow. It will soon be over. Peace and victory will be ours. Medical History The rod of Hermes ‘Soon be over, son. I just want you to follow my finger with your eyes. That’s it, don’t move your head now. Just the eyes.’ Doctor Ballinger wrote something down, let his pen drop onto the pad with a plop, folded his arms and beamed across at me like a confiding uncle. ‘Well?’ I said. ‘I don’t think there’s too much to worry about physically. No sign of concussion. Blood pressure fine, pulse fine. You seem to be a very fit young man.’ The balls of my feet were rocking up and down at tremendous speed. ‘But my memory, doctor … why can’t I remember anything?’ ‘Well now, I don’t think we need get ourselves in too much of a panic about that. These things happen.’ I nodded glumly, feeling the goose-pimples rise on my legs in the draught of air-conditioning.

177

‘I want you to do something for me now, Mike. I want you to look at this wallet here.’ A black leather wallet lay on the desk between us. I eyed it uncomfortably. Steve had been sent to bring it back from the strange room in which I had awoken that morning. ‘Go ahead, it’s not gonna bite you. Pick it up! Take a look inside. Tell me what you see.’ I took out an American Express credit card and held it in my fingers. I saw the name ‘Michael D Young’ and ran my thumbnail over the embossed lettering. ‘Member since 1992. Expires 08/98.’ ‘Talk to me, Mike.’ ‘It’s an American Express card.’ ‘Uh huh. Whose?’ ‘Well … mine, I suppose. But I’ve never seen it before.’ ‘You sure about that?’ ‘I’m certain. “Michael D Young” it says. I never use my middle initial like that. Never. So, it can’t be mine.’ ‘Okay, okay. What else do you see in the wallet?’ ‘There’s some kind of ID card, a driving licence.’ ‘You see a driver’s license. Is there a photograph on it?’ ‘Me. It’s me, but again I swear to you I’ve never seen this before.’ ‘That’s okay. Take your time, have a good look. What is the issuing state?’ I looked at it, puzzled. ‘State of Connecticut, it says. Is that what you mean?’ ‘And what do you think of when you say the word Connecticut, Mike? What images come into your mind?’ ‘Urn … Paul Revere?’ ‘Paul Revere. Good. Tell me what you know about Paul Revere.’ ‘The midnight ride?’ ‘Midnight ride, excellent. Go on.’ ‘He rode from Lexington to Concord. Or Concord

178

to Lexington, was it? He shouted “the British are coming, the British are coming!” I don’t know much else. It’s not really my period, I’m afraid.’ It’s not really my period! Something stirred inside me, a rustle of memory, but it scrabbled away like a frightened fieldmouse as I approached. ‘Fine. You’re doing fine. Tell me what else you see there.’ ‘Well, there’s another card here. Also with my name on it. There’s that Greek symbol on it. The staff with the snakes entwined … oh, what’s it called?’ Ballmger shrugged his shoulders. ‘You tell me, Mike.’ ‘Caduceus! It’s a caduceus, the rod of Hermes. There! Why can I remember a word like “caduceus” and not remember who I am?’ ‘Well now, one step at a time. What do you think that card might be?’ ‘I don’t know. The caduceus is a medical symbol isn’t it? Is this a national health card?’ ‘What’s a national health card, Michael?’ I stared at him. Tve no idea. I’ve no idea at all. It just popped into my head. Don’t you know?’ ‘That’s your medical insurance card, Michael.’ ‘But I don’t go private.’ ‘Excuse me?’ ‘I … I don’t use health insurance. I’m on the national health, I’m sure of it.’ Ballinger gazed at me blankly. ‘Would you have any cause to be faking a little episode of loopiness here, Michael? That’s what I’m wondering. Some trouble at home? A girl maybe? Your work getting on top of you, fear of failure?’ ‘Faking? Faking? Why on earth would I be faking?’ ‘I had to ask, Mike. So tell me what you mean by “national health”?’ I spread my hands despairingly. ‘I don’t know. I really don’t know. It means something, I’m sure of that.’

179

‘I see. Tell me then who you think the card might belong to?’ I looked at it miserably. ‘It’s mine, I suppose. It must be mine.’ I squeezed my eyes shut. ‘I just can’t remember ‘Don’t force yourself now. You can put your wallet down. Maybe it would be a good idea if you could tell me some things you do remember.’ Something in the way he said that told me that he was improvising here. He had never dealt with anything like this before and he was simply winging it, guessing the right questions to ask. He was as confused as I was. I sensed too, that he was annoyed, just faintly annoyed, that his attempts to jog my memory or kick me out of my fantasy or expose my sham were not working. ‘What’s wrong with me, doctor?’ ‘Woah, one thing at a time. Answer my question first. What can you tell me that you positively remember?’ ‘Well, I remember being sick last night. I banged my head on a wall. I was pissed I suppose …’ ‘Why?’ ‘Sorry?’ ‘Why were you pissed?’ ‘Well, because I had been drinking.’ ‘And that angered you?’ ‘Angered me?’ I repeated, puzzled. ‘Not really …’ ‘So why were you pissed?’ ‘Oh,’ I said, suddenly twigging. ‘You mean pissed off. I meant pissed as in drunk, not pissed as in pissed off. You see, in England when we say “pissed” … never mind.’ Ballinger’s blank look was beginning to irritate me. ‘Anyway, I remember banging my head. And getting on a bus. And waking up this morning feeling weird.’ ‘And before that? What do you remember from before?’ ‘I don’t know, almost nothing. Cambridge, of course. I remember Cambridge. That’s where I’m supposed to be.’ ‘You have plans to visit friends in school at Harvard maybe?’ ‘Harvard? What do you mean?’

180

‘Harvard is in Cambridge, Massachusetts, maybe you made an appointment to meet some friends there.’ ‘No! I mean Cambridge. You know, the Cambridge. St Matthew’s.’ ‘Cambridge, England?’ ‘Yes, and I should be there. I should be there now! There’s something important. Something I have to do, something that happened. If I could only remember …” ‘Hey now! You sit right down, Michael. Getting yourself all excited is not going to help any. Let’s just stay calm.’ I lowered myself back down into the chair. ‘Why has this happened to me?’ I said. ‘What’s going on?’ ‘Well now that’s what we’re here to find out. You tell me you remember Cambridge, England.’ ‘I think so.’ ‘You like English things maybe?’ ¦ ‘What do you mean?’ He shrugged. ‘What are your politics, for example?’ ‘Politics? I don’t have any politics.’ ‘No politics, fine. But your parents came from England originally did they not, Mike? Back in the sixties.’ ‘My parents?’ ‘Your mother and father.’ ‘I know what parents are!’ I snapped. Ballinger’s style was beginning to irritate me, much as I could see that my confusion was now openly irritating him. He didn’t reply, but just wrote something down on his pad, which annoyed me still further. Just trying to mask his distaste. ‘I know this,’ I said. ‘My father is dead, and my mother lives in Hampshire.’ ‘You think your Mom lives in New Hampshire?’ ‘No, not New Hampshire. Just Hampshire. Old Hampshire. Hampshire, England if you like.’ ‘You ever been to England, Michael?’ ‘Been there? It’s my home. I grew up there, I live there. I should be there now.’ ‘You like to watch English movies?’

181

‘I like all movies. Not English ones particularly. There aren’t enough of them for a start.’ ‘Maybe they’re too political for you.’ ‘What do you mean?’ He didn’t reply, but ruled a line on his pad, let the pen drop down onto the pad once more and rested his chin on his hands. ‘Maybe you’d like to be a film actor, is that it? Maybe you see yourself as a big Hollywood star.’ ‘Actor? I’ve never acted in my life. Not so much as a nativity play.’ ‘See, I’m trying to account for this accent you’re putting on, Michael.’ I’m not putting it on! This is how I talk. This is me.’ Ballinger picked up a thick directory from his desk and rifled through the pages, running the tip of his pen down the columns. ‘Senior year undergraduates,’ he said to himself. ‘Let me see, Wagner … Williams … Wood … Yelling … bingo!’ He drew a circle on the page and pushed the book towards me. ‘I want you to do something for me, Mike. I want you to look at that name and that number and tell me what you see?’ ‘Er … Young, Michael D, 303 Henry Hall. 342 122.1/ ‘Good. Now I want you to watch me as I call that number, okay?’ He pressed a button on his telephone and the sound of a dialling tone emerged from its built-in speaker. ‘Call out that number for me, Michael.’ ‘Three-four-two. One two, two one.’ ‘Three-four-two,’ repeated Ballinger, dialling, ‘twelve twenty-one.’ Puzzled, I listened to the ringing tone. ‘But if that’s my number, then why … ?’ Ballinger held up a hand. ‘Sh! Just listen now.’ The ringing tone stopped and was followed by a click and a cheerful voice. ‘Hi, it’s Mikey. You called, I was out, but hey, it’s not the end of the world. Leave a

182

message after the tone and maybe, if you’re real lucky, I’ll get back to you.’ Ballinger pressed the hands-free button again, folded his arms and looked at me. ‘Wasn’t that you, Mike? Wasn’t that your voice we heard?’ I stared at the telephone. ‘But it can’t have been ‘You know that it was.’ ‘But that was American!’ ‘That’s my point, Mikey. You’re American. I have your medical records. You were born in Hartford, Connecticut, April 20th 1972.’ ‘It’s not true! I know you don’t believe me, but I’m telling you, it just is not true. I mean, you’re right about my birthday, but I was born in England, at least, that is, I grew up in England.’ ‘And what did you do there?’ ‘I don’t knowl I was at Cambridge. Doing … something. I can’t remember. God, this is a dream, this must be a dream. Everything is wrong, everything has changed. I mean, Christ, even my teeth are wrong.’ ‘Your teeth?’ ‘They’re straighter than they should be. Whiter. My hair is shorter. And …’I broke off, blushing at the memory of the shower. ‘Go on.’ ‘My penis,’ I whispered, a hand over my mouth. Ballinger closed his eyes. ‘Excuse me, did you say your penis?’ Even as I replied I could hear him laughing about this with colleagues, writing up case-notes for publication, shaking his head at the erotic hysteria of the young. ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘It’s my foreskin. It’s disappeared. Gone.’ He stared at me wide-eyed as I buried my face in my hands and wept. Personal History Rudis wartime diary Josef buried his face in his hands and laughed till Hans thought he might burst.

183

Ausgezeichnet! That’s brilliant! Brilliant. I will tell it to the Colonel at lunch. He just loves jokes like that. Here’s one for you now. If Ludendorff and the Kaiser both jumped off a high tower at exactly the same time, which one would hit the ground first?’ Hans Mend wrinkled his nose and inspected the ceiling. ‘Mmrnrn … I give up,’ he said. Josef raised his shoulders and spread his hands, ‘Who cares?’ He nudged Hans violently in the side and roared with laughter again. ‘Hey! Who cares!’ Mend joined in dutifully and took careful sips of his schnapps between buffets to the ribs. ‘Ha!’ he said. ‘Who cares! Wonderful.’ The life of a messenger had its advantages. It was absurdly dangerous to career back and forth between the reserve trenches, HQ and the front line, easy pickings for any bored enemy sniper and as often as not the potential victim of crossfire from one’s own side. Sometimes the weather and the terrain allowed for a motorbike, as today, but often it was a question of slogging through churned mud on foot. And that cliche about blaming the messenger … how many times Mend had opened his satchel, handed over some orders about which he knew nothing and then been withered in a raking salvo of abuse from some jumped-up junior officer with an imagined grievance against the General Staff. Nonetheless, for the privilege of being able to get away from the front line saps and trenches, even for an hour or so at a time, Hans would have undergone twice the danger. And after all, he was alive now, wasn’t he? For four years he had been in the thick of the fighting, from the very first month of the war until now, with only two minor wounds in all that time, two small scars to show his grandchildren one day m the distant peace. If you survived your first two months, they said, you would survive for ever. So, against the danger, you had to weigh the perks. A glass of schnapps and a pipe of decent tobacco at Staff

184

HQ - sure, you get a fool like Josef Kreiss to enjoy them with - but great luxury nonetheless. Hans sighed, put down his glass and rose. ‘Going already?’ ‘I must. Westenkirchner is on leave and they haven’t sent through a replacement. Lots to be done.’ Josef limped over to his desk and made a show of looking carefully through packets of documents. As if, thought Hans, he actually had any hand in their selection. The man’s a clerk, for God’s sake. Why can’t he just give me what he’s been ordered to give me and have done with it? Why this feeble charade every time? ‘Ah,’ said Josef, weighing a piece of paper in his hand and slipping it into Hans’s satchel. ‘This might interest you. It has to do with someone who is, I believe, a friend of yours.’ ‘Who’s that?’ ‘Gloder? Hauptmann Rudolf Gloder?’ ‘Rudi? What about him?’ ‘Oh, it’s Rudi, is it? We regularly refer to our betters by their Christian names, I see. Perhaps I should send a memorandum to General Buchner on this. He does not approve of this kind of Bolshevism amongst the lower ranks.’ Hans closed his eyes. ‘What about Hauptmann Gloder, Josef?’ ‘Ah, wouldn’t you like to know?’ Eyes still closed, Hans now breathed in deeply through his nose. ‘Yes, Josef,’ he said calmly, ‘I would like to know.’ Jesus, the puerility of these people. ‘Well, it so happens that a recommendation has come through. Iron Cross, First Class, Diamond order.’ Hans did not attempt to hide his pleasure. ‘Wonderful,’ he cried. ‘And about time too. He should have had it three times over.’ ‘My, aren’t we pleased!’ ‘It’s good news, Kreiss, that’s all. Ru- Hauptmann Gloder deserves this honour. Without him our.regiment would

185

have fallen apart months ago, years probably. I wouldn’t be surprised if he made Major before the war’s over. Like me he joined up as an ordinary Landser you know.’ ‘Well that’s wartime for you. The scum rises to the top’ ‘The cream rises,’ said Hans. ‘He’s from a fine family, he could have joined as an officer, but as it happens he chose not to.’ ‘So he’s got friends in high places,’ said Kreiss. ‘What’s new?’ ‘He’s got friends in all places,’ retorted Hans. ‘Unlike some.’ ‘Well, well, I’m sure this Gloder is a paragon of all the virtues. He’s obviously got you eating out of his hand, anyway.’ Leaning down on the handlebars, mud flying up onto his goggles, Hans chewed on the news with pleasure. He pictured to himself the party that Rudi would most certainly throw in celebration of this decoration. A dinner in a first class restaurant somewhere behind the lines, perhaps even Le Coq D’Or. There would be music, glorious wine, laughter and real German comradeship. Gloder would not be embarrassed to invite officers and men to sit at the same table. Later on there would be girls. Expensive, pox-free girls. Hans drew up at the fermier, threw his motorcycle against the wall of the stable-yard and hurried through to the house. At the moment Gloder was on attachment to Major Eckert of the Sixth Franconians as acting adjutant, an assignment, he had told Hans, that irked him excessively. ‘I do not like to be missing the fun,’ he had said on finding himself stuck half a mile behind the lines in the small farmhouse that constituted Colonel Baligand’s HQ. ‘Eckert’s idea of war is to lick the arse of the general staff and pray for peace. I do what I can to fire him into action, but I’m a soldier. I’d be more use at the front.’

186

Hans delivered a bundle of despatches to the Colonel’s ADC, waited in a fever of impatience to receive papers in return and then, as excited as a child on Christmas morning, he hurled himself up the stairs to the first floor, where Major Eckert’s staff had their offices and quarters. Hans stood on the landing and straightened his tunic. He decided to play it very cool. ‘Good day, Hauptmann Gloder,’ he would say languidly, ‘nothing very interesting today, I’m afraid. Just this from HQ. Probably some chit forbidding the use of paprika in donkey stew or announcing that every man is to polish his buttocks thoroughly in honour of the Kaiserin’s birthday.’ Rudi would smile at this, take up the letter and open it. He would read it through and then look up to see Hans beaming down at him fit to bust and then he would roar with laughter and bring out his oldest bottle of Cognac. Hans walked past the door to Major Eckert’s office, satchel tightly in hand, until he came to the end of the corridor where stood a door of bleached French oak. Carved upon it by hand in perfect Gothic lettering were the words: Schlok Gloder Hans grinned and knocked lightly. No reply. He knocked again, louder this time. Still no cheerful answering voice. Disappointed, Hans pressed down the black iron latch and pushed the door open. With no clear idea of what he should do, he entered and looked around. It was a large, square room, with another door leading off to a bedroom. It was amazing to Hans that anyone should wish to give up this princely suite for life on a dug-out bunk but then, he reminded himself, Gloder was not anyone. He approached the desk, pulled the envelope from his satchel and laid it squarely in the centre of the massive leather-cornered blotter. Hans stepped back into the middle of the room and looked at the effect. Not enough.

187

Smiling at himself for such schoolboy foolishness, he took up a silver letter-opener and a pen, arranging them above the envelope at ten-to and ten-past the hour, so that they pointed at it, shouting: ‘Look at me! Look at me!’ Still not quite the desired effect, he decided. A pencil at six o’clock helped, but ruined the symmetry. Hans opened one of the drawers and rummaged around for appropriate pointing implements. He came across two more pens, an English hand grenade of the type known as a Mills bomb, the trophy of some daring raid Hans supposed, and a loaded Luger pistol. Perhaps he should arrange a circle of bullets around the letter, their sharp ends pointing inwards? That would be very fine. While he was pondering this artistic possibility he opened another drawer. Nothing but papers here. And at the back of the drawer a thick book bound in glowing tree-calf leather. Hans took it out. He did riot think he had ever seen anything so fine. The weight of it, the sheen of it, the gleam of gold from the page edges. The book was held shut by a gold clasp in the centre of which was a small keyhole. Hans, his heart beating fast, pulled at the clasp. To his surprise it was unlocked. Perhaps it was unlockable. His own memory of such books was that the locks never worked anyway. Hans slowly turned the first page as though he were opening an original Guttenburg bible. Das Kriegstagebuch bon RudoIf Gloder Rudi kept a diary! Trembling, Hans turned to the next page. Two bars of music were hand-written at the top of the page and below it the words: Blut - Bruderschaft schwore ein Eid! Wagner, Hans supposed. An oath to blood-brotherhood. How impossibly Teutonic, how magnificently Rudi. He turned to a random page near the beginning. In his girlish enthusiasm, Hans was hoping above all else that he might find some reference to himself, however small. 14th January, 1917

188

I am finding that the translation from Leutnant to Oberleutnant is almost meaningless. It is the next hurdle that counts. ‘Hauptmann Gloder.’ That would sound very well indeed. There are some officers who still resent my ascension. Very well, let them. Gutmann, I have noted, is the only officer to greet me as a brother, but we know his motives. The Jew will do anything to ingratiate himself into pure-blooded company. He also regards me, insultingly, as some kind of fellow intellectual. His idea of the intellect is far from mine. He is useful however. He has studied military history very deeply and I allow him to think me his friend. Four members of a wiring detail were killed by snipers yesterday. I wrote letters of condolence to their families back home, the first time I have had to perform such a duty. Eckert showed me the standard letter that is used on such occasions. Not good enough for me. I wrote four beautiful and distinct letters, making up all sorts of nonsense about the heroism of each dead trooper. ‘May I add on a personal note, that Wolfgang’s loss is not just your own? He was dearly loved here. His spirit, his courage, his humour and his charm are irreplaceable to us, as his memory is sacred.’ And then quotations from Goethe and Holderlm. All for some clod-hopping oaf of a farm boy who didn’t have the wit to dodge a bullet. Each letter will no doubt be framed in gilt and hung on a wall somewhere. As Puck so righdy says:- Lord, what fools these mortals be! Otherwise a dull, bitterly cold day. Hans looked up from the book, frowning. He did not understand the quotation in English, which he supposed to be Shakespeare, but he could not like the reference to oafs and clod-hoppers. Well, bitterly cold day it was that day, and everyone has his moods. He turned ahead to the middle of the book. 22nd April, 1918 Spring at last! Wintersturme wichen dem Monnemond in mildem Lichte leuuchtet der Lenz; auf Linden Luften Leicht und lieblich

189

Munder webend er sich weiegt; durch Wald und Auen weht sein Atem, weit geoffnet lacht sein Aug’. Well, in theory. The winter storms may have vanished, but the artillery storms are with us still. And while the gentle light of springtime may in truth be shining out on lovely light balmy breezes, the breath that blows through woods and meadows is not laughing with smiling eyes, but scowling wickedly as it hisses out huge rolling clouds of poison. Yes, another gas attack from Tommy. Two dead this morning, and Ernst Schmidt injured. Mend and I were the first to dive for masks, but Schmidt insisted on staying up to sound the alarm. He nearly paid for such stupidity with his life. As soon as I saw what he was up to, I leaped out again with a mask for him and dashed about the place like a tiger cheering the ranks and tending the wounded. Schmidt got all the credit however, so I was the first to pat him like the dumb faithful dog he is and promise the recommendation of a mention up the line for his ’selfless courage’. Intensely annoying. Hans felt his heart sink as he read on. Went along the line relaying new orders on the use of gramophones in dug-outs. How wise our masters are, what a firm grip they have on priorities! Schmidt’s bravery the talk of the ranks. None louder in their praise than I. I make a joke about ‘Tommy’s “Gift” of poison gas’ but not enough people speak English to understand the pun. Good news and bad news came through. The good news is that we seem to be holding Messines Ridge and Armentieres. If we can thrust forward before the Americans get a real foothold in the Western Front this latest push will succeed. The bad news, not a rumour this time, but certified fact, is that Rittmeister von Richthofen was shot down and killed yesterday by a tyro Canadian pilot. Much gloom all around. For two years I have envied ‘Den Roten Freiherrn’ and the worship he inspired, but secretly I have known that Berlin’s adoption of his myth was fatal. The British will bury him with full military honours. Some doubt apparently as to whether it was the

190

Canadian who shot him down, or Australian machine gunners on the ground. He was flying low. An argument in the Mess after dinner. Gut-mann, it turns out, venerates Wagner, which I find absurd. His theories on the works are hopelessly, and I believe wickedly, distorted. He sees them all as ‘layered with psychic and political meaning’. Like all his race he refuses to recognise that a thing is a thing. That a work of art means what it says and is what it is. But no, he must read his strata of convoluted rubbish into every phrase. I grew irritated and sensing the Colonel’s boredom, I decided to have a little sport with our Hugo. I said he would do well to remember Mime and Siegfried. Mime the stunted little Niebelung, teaching Siegfried to forge the sword and all the while planning to betray him. (I could tell that Gutmann knew by the way I said ‘Niebelung’ that I really meant Jew’.) Mime the Jew plotting to exploit Siegfried’s fearlessness and purity as a means of achieving the ring and winning power

over all the world. And what happens to Mime? Why, Siegfried slays the dragon, takes the ring and then turns the sword on Mime. Ha, ha! The name Mime is, after all, very close to the word ‘Memme’ and they don’t come any more cowardly than the Niebelungen. Of course they get their vile revenge by stabbing Siegfried in the back. But they don’t get the ring! They will never get the ring. ‘The ring that they themselves made,’ Gutmann pointed out smugly. ‘That they made from the gold that they stole!’ I retorted. ‘It will never belong to them. Never!’ ‘No, that is clear,’ Gutmann agreed in that head-nodding, I’m-so-wise-and-humble rabbinical manner. ‘Power over the world will only belong to those who are prepared to renounce love.’ ‘Well one thing’s for certain, it won’t belong to an overblown brothel-keeper like you,’ I said, losing my temper. The whole table roared with laughter. They knew

191

that for all his precious Heidelberg wit and pretentious intellect, Gutmann’s obscene wealth

comes from the string of cheap theatres his father owns all across Germany. You don’t go to such squalid places for Schiller and Shakespeare, you go there for girls. (I should know!!!) Gutmann went very red and left the room, bowing stiffly like a bantam Junker, the junior officers repeating the taunt after him as he went: Aufgeblasene Puffmutter! Aufgeblasene Puffmutter! In conversation with the Colonel afterwards, I said that Gutmann was not so bad a fellow. His real fault, I said, was that he had been away from real fighting for so long that he had lost touch with the reality around him. But then, I added modestly, my own theories about how middle-ranking officers should from time to time be encouraged to fight alongside the men were no doubt hopelessly outdated and sentimental … ‘Not at all,’ said the Colonel. ‘Not at all …’ and I could see that I had set him thinking. Ha! I shouldn’t be surprised if Hugo Gutmann finds himself at the front line in a few days’ time and, with luck and a little management from me, the world may well be one Jew shorter. Drunk to bed. The Colonel kept me up and dropped a hint that I may be in line for promotion! Life is good. With trembling fingers Hans turned the pages to an entry for a more recent date. 24th May, 1918 Bumped into Mend and Schmidt this morning. They told me some ridiculous story about last night’s French raiding party getting hold of Baligand’s best helmet, which his fool of an adjutant (at least Gutmann was diligent, God rot his soul) had left there in Oberleutnant Fleck’s dug-out after yesterday afternoon’s inspection. Monsieur had crawled along some saps dug (how well I remember!) three and a half bloody years ago and crawled into Fleck’s

192

trench knifing the sentry and cutting the throats of any sleeping soldiers they came across, including Fleck’s. They came away with some papers (of less military importance than the crablice nibbling at my cock), five rifles, a box of dud grenades and, it now transpires, Colonel Baligand’s fucking ceremonial fucking helmet. I made furious sabre-rattling noises about this outrage (as if I cared a damn) and was then outraged to feel Schmidt’s grubby hands on my sleeve. He babbled incomprehensibly through a gas-corrupted throat about how he knew exactly what I was thinking, and I was about to pat him fraternally on the head and leave, when I realised that in fact he was begging me not to be impulsive and attempt to retrieve the helmet myself! As though I would ever dream of doing such a dumb thing. The French can crap in it every night from now until doomsday as far as I’m concerned. Of course, if I were challenged, I would have to have a go at it, it’s just the kind of action that makes a reputation, but Ernst the fool, was challenging me not to. The man simply worship me, it’s sick but rather exhilarating. I allowed him to believe that heroic Rudolf was indeed mad as fire and determined to launch a single-handed assault on the entire French army, just to recover a brass shitpot. Then suddenly a rather wonderful plan popped into my head. I thought, damn it, I bet I can persuade him to go! I played on his recent injury, suggesting that I was worried about his fitness and recommending that he be relieved of combat duties. His stubborn peasant mind reacted to this as if it were a great insult! I knew he wanted to prove himself to me and I am certain that he swallowed the bait like the lumpen peasant he is. Mend was still hanging about so I dared not be too obvious. But I caught up with Schmidt later and very subtly worked on him for half an hour. I’m almost certain he will try something foolish.

193

Well, it may or may not work. Past midnight now. I will take myself off in an hour or so and watch. The north revetment will give me a perfect view from the Ku’damm across to no man’s land. If Schmidt goes in search of glory I shall see. What if he goes with someone else? Hm. No, he will go alone. Hans Mend is his only friend and Mend is far too much of a coward to approve of such lunacy. Schmidt will go unaccompanied and if he succeeds in bringing back the helmet I will crawl to the wire to meet him, as if on my way to do the same thing myself and we will return in triumph together. I see from my almanac that there is almost no moon tonight. Excellent! Schmidt is certain to go. 25th May, 1918 God is good to me. I waited for an hour gazing all around me and beguiling the time by seeing how many constellations I could name. Twenty-three, not bad. I had decided that if Schmidt didn’t appear by two o’clock I would turn in. He would need at least two hours of darkness to negotiate the wire and make his way to the French lines in silence. Sure enough, bang on fourteen hundred hours I saw him, just two metres below me, heaving himself up from the advance trench and making for the nearest doorway in the wire. It was too dark to identify him exactly, but from the piglike grunting and gasping noises bubbling from him I knew it could have been no one else but honest, stupid Schmidt. For ten minutes I had no idea what was going on, but a shivering in the wire that twanged all along the line told me that he was at least making some progress. He was certainly managing to keep quiet. Not a sound did I hear after that slight disturbance in the wire. For an hour I waited, field-glasses trained on Sector K where I assumed he was heading. Part of me envied him. I should like to have done what he was doing and I dare say I might have done too, if someone had dared me or

194

doubted me. I am not a coward, God knows, but bravery must have a purpose. To make a reputation, to achieve an end. Schmidt’s style of bravery was entirely devoid of imagination, the unquestioning bravery of cannon-fodder. I became aware of light leaking into the sky from behind our lines. Still no sign of Schmidt. I gave myself up to thoughts once more, reciting Goethe to myself and translating it into French for amusement. At last, fifteen minutes later I saw him, a dark shape zigzagging in my direction through the gloom. One arm held the colonel’s helmet by its strap, under the other I could make out the shape of some kind of sword. What an excellent fellow. I dropped down onto the duckboards and made my way to the nearest trench ladder. I climbed up and wormed my way over dry mud towards the wire. Once there, I looked up in time to see Schmidt halt, breathless and drop down into a shell-hole. It occurred to me that I could go out there now, shoot him dead and return alone in glory. I decided against carrying out such an operation until I had thought it thoroughly through. I had no objection on moral grounds, of course. One’s personal growth in life is the only morality, but I knew well that precipitate action is always ill-advised. If you have made a plan, stick to it. Lesser men will respond to the surprise of the moment and believe they should be commended for initiative and enterprise, when all they have really done is reveal that their plan was incomplete, that they had not weighed every eventuality, predicted every move and prepared every conceivable response. Of course, an ability to react to the unexpected is vital; imagination and initiative are certainly useful weapons in the general’s armoury, but they are to be deployed only when necessary - the fatal mistake is to act when unprovoked, putting into action sudden new ideas which are insufficiently analysed. A study of various historical

195

figures teaches us this. Most people would be amazed if they knew the detail into which great commanders went. I read last week, for example, an account of the English admiral Horatio Nelson and his strategy meetings before the crucial naval engagement at Trafalgar. He drove his officers nearly insane, loving him dearly as they did, with his insistence of going over the plans time and time again. He did not move on until he was sure that every officer in the fleet knew and understood the wider purpose and meaning of his primary strategy. Only then did he begin the laborious task of explaining the tactical variations. ‘If this, then this,’ and so on, branching out into a dozen other ifs and thens until hundreds of scenarios had been exhaustively worked through. When the battle commenced Nelson was serenity itself, amazing all with his apparent indifference to every cannonade and broadside. Of course! Because every cannonade and broadside was expected and accounted for. Even when he fell, fatally wounded, he remained calm. Just such a possibility had been foreseen and well-drilled contingency plans swung easily into operation. He died knowing that victory was assured. He lacked swagger, assurance and political craft, of course, and would never have risen any higher than admiral, but few men can combine all the qualities necessary to make a great leader of men both on and off the field of battle. And so I refused to act on my impulse of the moment, tempting as it was, until I had weighed every possibility. I did not doubt that I could approach Schmidt then and there, in the middle of no man’s land, dispatch him and return safely, bearing those two ridiculous trophies home in triumph. But on further consideration I realised that this would be foolish. Safer to dispatch him, return empty-handed under cover of semi-darkness and then, when it was light, make my way to the body and bring everything back in full view of my fellows. They could protect me, and if needs be I could remove any tell-tale

196

friendly bullet from his back before the body was seen by anyone else. That is undoubtedly what I would have done if Schmidt had only taken half an hour less about the whole business. But it was now growing too light for me to risk venturing forward, from the standpoint of both my personal safety and the danger of being spotted from my own trenches. I cursed his laborious progress. Why hadn’t he set out earlier? I know that if I had gone off on such an expedition 1 shouldn’t have tarried like this. I would have been home free by now. Schmidt too must have realised that time was running out. For at that moment, he poked his head above the edge of the crater, gathered up the sword and the helmet and started back in a crouching run. He had covered no more than ten metres when I heard the distant crack of a rifle and saw a brief spear of flame from the very direction of Sector K. Monsieur had woken up and discovered his loss. Monsieur knew how to shoot. Schmidt threw out his arms and fell forwards, spread-eagled in the dirt. This was even better than I could have imagined. I hugged myself with pleasure. Providence can be very kind. All I had to do now was wait for sunlight. An hour passed before I heard the first stirrings in our trenches. The usual farting, grumbling and groaning, followed by the whisding of the batmen and boodle-boys as they went around with coffee and shaving water for their masters. Soon someone would spot Schmidt’s body, and then they would see me and assume I had acted on the heroically loyal impulse to rescue the body of a Kamerad. I reckoned that so long as I kept flat enough I would be able to wriggle as far as the foxhole. My own side would surely have the wit to put up smoke. And then a dash back to the wire followed by a tearful, Wagnenan scene

197

which would see me fending off all adulation and walking nobly away to commune with my grief. Even such a childishly obvious tactic as a smoke-screen took them a long time to work out. I found out later that it was Hans Mend into whose dim mind the idea eventually penetrated. Good God, imagine my life being in the hands of such half-wits! But the smoke did come, which also had the advantage of aiding the production of tears quite marvellously in the final scene. Once I was sure of adequate- ‘An entertaining read, I trust?’ The sudden shock of Rudi’s voice in the room caused Hans to drop the diary onto the desk and jump to his feet. Rudi Gloder was standing in the doorway, watching him with an amused smile on his face. ‘Don’t you know that it is impolite to read a man’s diary without asking permission first?’ Hans found that his voice did not work. He tried to speak but no words came. Only tears. Tears and a ravenous hunger for revenge. Potted History PJ’s famous pancakes ‘Hungry, Mike?’ ‘Ravenous.’ ‘I promised you PJ’s, so let’s go.’ I followed Steve along the pavement, the sidewalk, the whatever, and looked around me. ‘This is Nassau,’ said Steve, following my eyes. ‘Main Street, Princeton. Named for Prince William of Orange- Nassau, or so they tell me. Campus to the left, bars, coffee shops, bookstores and stuff to the right.’ ‘It’s kind of cute,’ I said. ‘Yeah, maybe too cute. Over there is Palmer Square and between here and Palmer Square, we find Wither-spoon, home of the A and B.’ He cocked his head towards me quizzically, expecting it seemed, some kind of a reaction. ‘Uh … the A and B?’

198

‘The Alchemist and Barrister. It’s a pub?’ he added, with that rising question intonation peculiar to Americans and Australians. ‘Pub? I didn’t think you used the word pub m America.’ ‘Sure we do. Sometimes. Specially in Princeton. And most specially when it’s an Irish bar like the A & B. We were there last night, matter of fact, knocking back Sam Adams and Absoluts like they were going out of style.’ ‘Sam Adams?’ It’s a beer, dark beer. Like an ale? We drank quarts of it, with plenty of straight vodka on the side.’ ‘And we were in there, last night? You and me?’ ‘You, me and some other guys.’ I nodded slowly. ‘I remember hurling, that I do remember. That’s when I woke up. As it were.’ ‘Yeah, that was in Palmer Square outside. You banged your head against the wall you were puking up all over. Doc Ballinger thinks that maybe that’s what did it. The bang on the head.’ ‘Did what, Steve?’ I asked, looking at him straight and trying to keep a plug on the panic that was forcing up inside me. ‘What do you think is wrong with me? Is this what happens with amnesia? People start talking in a British accent and thinking they live in “Cambridge, England” instead of “Hertford, Connecticut”? That’s usual? What did that doctor say to you? You were with him for long enough. He must have a theory.’ He avoided my eye. ‘Doc Ballinger said to take things easy, Mike. To try and get you to enjoy the ride, crazy as it sounds. Not to force anything. We’re just gonna go around town, around campus, doing all the normal stuff. It’ll all come back to you soon, you can bet on it. Then this afternoon we’ll go see this guy Taylor.’ ‘Who’s he?’ ‘He’s a Professor of some kind.’ ‘A psychiatrist?’ ‘Yeah, something like that. But so what? I mean, you

199

know, he’ll prolly just give you a knock behind the ear with one of those little reflex hammers and you’ll be yourself again.’ ‘So you’re going to look after me? Show me where everything is. Remind me where everything is. Help jog some memories?’ He shrugged. ‘Looks that way.’ ‘Are we …’ I swallowed. ‘Are we good friends then? You and me? I’m sorry, I know that sounds loopy, but you see I really can’t remember anything, anything. So I need to be told even the most trivial things … not that friendship is a trivial thing,’ I added hastily. ‘I mean basic things … it’s just that I need to be told even the most basic things. I take it we are friends … buddies, is that the word?’ I wittered on in this fashion because I noticed that Steve had started to blush and I wanted to give him time to recover. It was, after all, a ridiculous question to ask of anyone. ‘Yeah, I guess you could say that,’ he managed to say. ‘I guess you could say we were buddies.’ ‘Is that … forgive me, I know it sounds ridiculous, but is that as in “best buddies”, or is there someone who knows me better?’ ‘Well …’ ‘I don’t mean,’ I interrupted hastily, ‘I don’t mean I’m not pleased that you’re looking after me. And grateful. I just … you know … wondered … that’s all.’ Poor Steve just didn’t know which way to look. I was sorry to embarrass him like this, but, Christ, I needed something to cling onto. ‘Heck, Mike. I don’t know what to say. I guess I know you as well as anybody, but …’ ‘I’m a bit of a loner,’ I suggested, helping him out. ‘I know that. Perhaps … do I have …’a picture of Jane leaning over me came suddenly into my head, ‘… a girlfriend of some kind?’

200

He slowed to a halt and his answer came out in an awkward, husky and barely audible tumble. ‘No girlfriend. Least … that is … none that I know of. So.’ ‘Right, thanks.’ Steve nodded, still unable to meet my eye, and then looking up, said in a more cheerful voice, welcoming the chance to change the subject, ‘Well, there it is!’ He pointed to a double-fronted shop on the other side of the street. ‘PJ’s’ was printed in fat, shadowed letters on a red and white striped awning above the door. ‘PJ’s.” explained Steve, unnecessarily, adding in a fanfaring kind of a voice, ‘Home of PJ’s fa-a-amous pancakes!’ I must slow down, I said to myself, as we crossed the road. I am going to need this guy’s help to get myself back to rights and it won’t do to alienate or embarrass him. For all I know, he thinks I am a jerk, has never really been my friend and is just being polite because he was the one to put me to bed and to find me this morning. He probably wants to be a million miles away. My first hand knowledge of Americans being slight, or so I believed, it surprised me that Steve so plainly disliked my questioning him on the subject of best buddies and girlfriends. We British were forever castigating ourselves for our inability to talk about relationships and intimate feelings and forever castigating the Americans for their inability to talk about anything else. Perhaps we had got it wrong. I said to myself ‘we British’ because, despite all testimonial, circumstantial and direct evidence to the contrary I still clung to the firm belief that I was English, brought up in Hampshire, and that some terrible mistake had been made or else someone was playing a sick joke on me. After all Pup, I told myself, you could no more have made up your accent, your vocabulary, your faint memories of a girl called Jane and a place called St Matthew’s than you could have faked that instinctive glance up the wrong side

201

of the road as you were crossing … hey! Another thought came to me as I dodged an angry car. Pup! I had just called myself Pup. Where did that come from? We reached the other side of the street. ‘Tell me something Steve,’ I said, ‘am I ever called Pup? I mean as a nickname. Pup or Puppy?’ His mouth spread into a broad grin as he held open the door of PJ’s for me. ‘Never heard you called that. Just Mike or Mikey. But Puppy works. Neat. Puppy! Yeah, I like that …’ ‘That’s strange,’ I said as I followed him in, ‘because I’ve a feeling that I don’t.’ We sat down at a table next to the window, overlooking Nassau Street. Overlooking Nassau, I suppose I should say. On the table I saw a salt-cellar, a pepper-pot, a chrome napkin-holder, a small chrome jug of milk, a bottle of Heinz ketchup, a jar of Gulden’s mustard and an ashtray. Steve’s first action on sitting down was to take out a packet of Strand cigarettes and shake one out at me. ‘You’re never alone with a Strand,’ I said, declining. ‘Excuse me?’ ‘You know, that campaign on posters all over America? Billboards, as you call them. In the fifties I think. Saying “You’re never alone with a Strand”. Famous advertising disaster. A picture of a man all on his own, smoking. Turned people off the brand in their millions, they started associating it with sad losers.’ ‘Yeah? I never heard about that. Sure you won’t have one?’ ‘I’m sure.’ Then I recalled that when I woke up that morning there had been a packet on my bedside table. I suddenly realised the implication. ‘My God,’ I said. ‘Are you telling me that I smoke?’ ‘Luckys. Well you did last night. Two packs. But if you don’t want one … hey, it’s heck of an opportunity to quit.’





Unknown




202

‘Funnily enough,’ I said. ‘There is something that I want. There’s a kind of hole in the middle of me. I thought perhaps it was to do with my … you know, not being able to remember anything … maybe, what the hell … I’ll try one.’ I took a cigarette. Steve lit it for me with a brass Zippo, steadying my hand as he lit the end. ‘Yoh,’ I said, inhaling. ‘Oh yes. This is definitely what I wanted. God that’s good! Why did I never know? Well, obviously I did …’ I looked around me, suddenly more cheerful and noticed that a lot of people were smoking. ‘Amazing,’ I said, ‘I thought smokers were virtually extinct in America.’ Steve laughed and was about to reply when– ‘Hiya Mikey, hiya Steve,’ a waitress appeared with two menus and two glasses of iced water. ‘Hello … Jo-Beth,’ I said, reading the badge on her apron. ‘What can I get you two this morning?’ she asked, giving us each a menu and plucking two napkins from the chromium holder. She had put the napkins on the table as coasters, placed a glass of water on each and whipped out her notepad before I had had a chance to look at the first item on what appeared to be an improbably huge and complex menu. ‘Er …” I said, nervously watching her pen hover over the pad. ‘Steve, you first.’ ‘I guess I’ll have my usual, Jo-B, and Mikey here will have the same.’ ‘Oh, you guys are 50 unadventurous …’ she sighed with amused scorn as she plucked back the menus, squiggled on her pad and whisked herself off. ‘One day we’ll surprise you,’ Steve called after her. ‘Urn, obvious question, I know,’ I whispered, leaning forward, ‘but what is my usual?’ Steve twinkled. ‘You’ll just have to wait and see ‘You know,’ I said, looking at the burning tip of my cigarette with affection. ‘Part of me is beginning to enjoy this. It’s so mad, it’s 50 confusing.’

203

‘Sure,’ said Steve, ‘that’s just the way to look at it.’ ‘It’s like a scene from that movie Total Recall’ ‘Total Recall? I never caught that one.’ ‘No? Arnie, Sharon Stone … from the Philip K Dick novel?’ He shook his head. ‘Passed me by. So, this place familiar? Anything coming back? The smell of the pancakes, the steamy windows, the color of the walls?’ I shook my head, but smilingly. ‘No-o-o. That is, not exactly. But this dinery sort of atmosphere, I’ve seen it in a thousand movies.’ ‘Now that’s one thing that’s weird, Mike. This English accent of yours. It’s nearly perfect, you know? But you say things like “movies” and “cute” that limeys never say. English people say “films” and “nice” and “oh, I say” and stuff like that.’ ‘I always say “movies”. A lot of English people do. And “cute” as well. After all, it’s not as if we don’t get exposed to American culture all the time, is it? In fact Jane says that I talk like …’I broke off, frowning. ‘Jane? Who’s Jane?’ I rubbed my nose, as smokers do. ‘I’m not sure. She wears a white coat and she left me. I know that. She took the Renault Clio.’ ‘The what?’ ‘It’s a make of car. A French car. Renault Clio.’ ‘Like Cleopatra?’ ‘No, C-L-I-O.’ ‘Whig-Clio!’ Steve struck the table in excitement. ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘Whig-Clio, they’re two buildings on campus. Hundreds of years old. We went there last night, to the Cliosophical Society.’ ‘The Cliosophical Society?’ ‘Sure, don’t you see? There was a debate about political relations between America and Europe. It was real boring, so we left early. So, what I’m saying, maybe what happened is that you had this bump on the head,

204

you fell asleep drunk as a skunk and then you had a dream! A dream so intense that you still haven’t truly woken up from it. Right? You dreamed you were in England and you made up this car, this French Clio, because that was the stuff in your mind! That’s it! I’ll bet that’s it.’ I stared at him, wanting to believe, but inwardly dubious. ‘It’s possible I suppose …’ ‘It’s definite!’ ‘What exactly is a Cliosophical Society?’ ‘Oh, you know, they do debates. It was named for Clio, the Muse of History or some such deal.’ ‘History! Of course … history,’ little rivulets of memory started to trickle into my mind. ‘I read history, don’t I ?’ ‘Gosh, you read all kinds of stuff. I don’t know.’ ‘I mean I study history. I … what’s the word, I major in history?’ He studied me carefully for a moment to make sure I wasn’t joking. ‘Get real, Mike. Philosophy. Your major is philosophy.’ I stared. ‘Philosophy? Did you say philosophy? Ow!’ Steve took the cigarette that had fallen from my fingers and pressed it into the ashtray. ‘Hey, careful there, buddy.’ ‘But I don’t know the first thing about philosophy!’ ‘Fact One. Carelessly smoked cigarettes can burn flesh. Fact Two. Burning flesh causes pain. Pain is bad. Conclusion. Do not smoke carelessly.’ Jo-Beth arrived. ‘Two breakfast specials. Enjoy, guys.’ I looked with disbelief at the tower of pancakes being set down before me. A lump of white butter was sliding around on the top of the stack. Arranged below, on the ground floor of the plate as it were, thin strips of crispy bacon coiled themselves around two fried eggs. I sucked the hot blister on the side of my finger and gazed in amazement at this alien still-life heaped up in front of me. Tm supposed to eat all this?’ ‘That’s the idea,’ said Steve, squaring his elbows.

205

‘And these?’ I enquired, holding up four sachets of maple syrup. ‘What are these for?’ In reply, he tore open two of his own sachets and drizzled the contents over his bacon. ‘Bacon and maple syrup?’ I said. ‘Now I know I’m dreaming.’ And yet, once I had forced myself to try, there was something fine about that breakfast. Something ineluctably right, as if my body had expected nothing less. ‘I cannot believe,’ I said when I had finished, lighting another cigarette and welcoming in the dark hit of smoke, ‘I cannot believe that I could have eaten all that.’ ‘Maybe it’s just what you needed,’ said Steve, pouring me coffee from a jug that Jo-Beth had deftly dropped in passing, on our table. ‘And I eat this kind of breakfast regularly?’ ‘Sure you do. Most every morning.’ ‘Then how come I’m not fifteen stone?’ ‘Excuse me?’ ‘You know, why aren’t I …’ I looked up at the ceiling and tried to calculate. ‘Why aren’t I two hundred pounds or whatever? Why aren’t I fat?’ Steve grinned. ‘Better ask Coach Heywood.’ My stomach dropped. ‘Oh God,’ I said. ‘Oh God, no. You are going to tell me that I do sports of some kind, aren’t you? I know it.’ ‘Get outta here. Mikey’s slider from hell?’ ‘Slider?’ ‘C’mon. Give me seven bucks and we’ll split.’ I took the wallet from the hip pocket of my shorts and pulled out some money. ‘Seven bucks?’ I said, spreading the notes out in front of me. ‘They’re all the same size.’ ‘Right,’ said Steve, grabbing some. ‘How ’bout that?’ Back out in Nassau Street, the Disneyland Gothic of the university facing us, Steve announced that we would go on a walk all round campus.

206

He explained that students went from Freshman Year to Sophomore Year, from Sophomore to Junior until finally they arrived at Senior Year, the fourth and last. We were both, apparently, at the end of our Junior Year and known therefore by our ‘classyear’ of 1997, the year we would graduate. Steve was majoring in physics, but he wanted to be something else, not a scientist. A writer, maybe, he thought. He had taken courses in history and poetry and thought they were neat. A great deal more local lore was fluently given out as we walked. He pointed to an elegant, ivy-clad building ahead. ‘An early governor of New Jersey, Jonathan Belcher was instrumental in bringing Princeton College here. If it weren’t for his modesty, Nassau Hall there, which is celebrating its two hundred and fiftieth birthday this year, would actually be known as Belcher Hall, which would be kind of embarrassing. George Washington drove the British from Nassau Hall way back in 1777 and five years later Princeton became the capital of the United States for a short while, and we are granted to this day the rare privilege of being able to fly the Stars and Stripes at night. Washington returned here to receive the thanks of the Continental Congress for his conduct of the war, and on 31st October news arrived to this very spot that the Treaty of Paris had been signed, formally ending the American Revolution. Visitors are requested to keep off the grass. Interior flashlight photography is not permitted. Thank you for your attention.’ ‘How the hell do you know all this?’ I asked. ‘I used to take around tour parties in my sophomore year. There’s groups going around all the time. You used to do it too.’ ‘I did?’ ‘Sure you did. Lots of students do. Good way to earn some dough. That’s Stanhope Gate over there. You pass through it on graduation, so it’s considered real bad luck

207

to use it. It’s gotten to be a kind of a superstition that no one goes out that way, except on the day they leave.’ I said I would rather look at the buildings which he considered would be the most familiar to me. “Kay/ said Steve, ‘we’ll go find out who’s in Chancellor Green, you spend a lot of time there. Let’s see what I can remember on the way. Oh, yeah, suck on this. In the old days the land around a university was called a yard or a green, okay? Then in the late 1700s the President of Princeton, Jonathan Witherspoon, he decided, being as how he was a classical scholar, to call the fields around Nassau Hall “the campus”, which is like Latin for “fields” and that’s why all school grounds everywhere are called “campus”. Great, huh?’ I agreed that it was great. He seemed pleased with my calm progress. ‘Now, something else,’ he said. ‘There’s two theories about why the top schools in America are called Ivy League, ‘kay? For one, on account of how each graduating year at Princeton used to plant ivy along the front of Nassau Hall. They stopped doing that some time this century, round about ‘41 when the whole building was covered. So now, when you graduate you plant ivy under the class plaques at the rear. So, Ivy League, you see? On account of the Ivy.’ ‘Makes sense,’ I agreed. ‘But you said there were two theories?’ ‘Right. The second theory is that to start with, in like the mid-eighteenth century, there was Harvard, Yale, Princeton and … one other, either Cornell or Dartmouth I guess. Just four schools. And the Roman numeral for four is the letters I and V, so they were like the IV Schools. Eye-vee, get it?’ ‘I like that theory best,’ I said after some thought. ‘And what about the place where I woke up? What’s that called?’ ‘Oh, that’s Henry Hall, a dorm on the west side of campus, in what we call the Slums.’

208

‘The Slums?’ ‘Yeah, actually it’s very picturesque. We call it the Slums on account of it’s a long walk from the center of campus where all the upperclassmen eating-clubs are. But it’s a neat place to dorm, handy for University Place where the Princeton University Store is, and the Macartney Theater and the Wawa Minimart, which is like a neat market. And this here,’ said Steve, indicating a small ornate building in front of us, ‘is the Chancellor Green Student Center. Guys hang out here a lot. There’s food and games and stuff in the Rotunda. Maybe you recognise it?’ I was hardly listening, for coming out of the door was something, someone rather, I most certainly did recognise. The very sight of him caused a massive bolt of memory to surge into me like hot RAM uploading into Johnny Mnemonic. Johnny Mnemonic … Keanu Reeves … Keanu Young, PhDude … Jane … little orange pills … so much returned at once I felt I might overload. ‘Double Eddie!’ I yelled. ‘Jesus, Double Eddie!’ Double Eddie looked towards me, then over his shoulder as though he thought I must be addressing someone else. I broke from Steve and ran up to him. ‘Bloody hell,’ I said, breathlessly. ‘Am I glad to see you! How are you? Have you any idea what the hell’s going on?’ He stared at me blankly. ‘Excuse me?’ I put a hand on his shoulder. ‘Come on, don’t fuck about, Eddie. It is you, isn’t it? I’d know you anywhere.’ Eddie looked from me to Steve who was hurrying up behind. ‘Think maybe we’d better be getting a move on, Mikey,’ said Steve. ‘I know this guy,’ I said. ‘You’re name’s Double Eddie, right?’ Double Eddie shook his head. ‘Sorry, man. It’s Tom.’ The American accent stung me to rage. ‘No!’ I shook his shoulder roughly. ‘Please don’t do this to me. You’re Edward Edwards, I know you are.’

209

‘Hey, cool it will you? Sure, my name is Edward Edwards. Edward Thomas Edwards, but I don’t know you.’ Steve gently pulled my hand away from Double Eddie’s shoulder. I could sense rather than see him making some gesture towards Eddie from behind me. Tapping a finger to his head, probably. Please excuse my loopy friend. ‘But when you were at Cambridge,’ I said desperately, ‘you were Double Eddie then. Your lover was James McDonell. You had a row and I picked up all your CDs. Remember?’ Double Eddie went very red and stood back. ‘What is this crap? I don’t know you. Get off my case, will you?’ Tm sorry …’ I said, running my fingers through my short hair. ‘I didn’t mean … but can’t you remember? St Matthew’s? Your CD collection? You and James, you lived in F4, Old Court. You had a bust-up but then you got back together again and everything was fine.’ ‘Fuck you, you calling me a queer?’ Double Eddie, scarlet in the face, pushed me hard in the chest. I fell back against Steve. ‘Hey, hey, hey!’ said Steve. ‘Just forget it, okay? Mikey here, he had an accident. He banged his head. His memory’s gone kinda funny. He don’t mean nothing by it. Let’s just calm down, what do you say?’ ‘Yeah?’ said Double Eddie. ‘Well you get him to shut up with that filthy queer shit, okay, or I’ll maybe bang his head some more.’ ‘Phoo-eee!’ said Steve as Eddie walked away. ‘You gotta go easy, boy. You just can’t go around saying stuff like that.’ ‘It is him,’ I said, watching Eddie’s departing back and remembering so clearly that grand stalk across Old Court and the petulant shedding of the CDs along the lawn. ‘I know it is. Besides, what’s with the homophobia?’ ‘The what?’ ‘I mean what’s so wrong with being queer?’ Steve stared at me. ‘You serious?’

210

‘Well, I mean in America of all places. I thought it was hip. You know, fashionable. He acted like some kind of macho squaddie.’ There was real fear in Steve’s eyes. ‘I think maybe the best thing is if we get you back to Henry. Get some shuteye before you see this Professor Taylor. Keep you from upsetting anyone else.’ ‘Yes,’ I said. The new memories triggered by the sight of Double Eddie were washing around inside me so violently that I could almost feel them lapping around my teeth. ‘You’re right. I need to be alone.’ Rewriting History Sir William Mills (1856-1932) Gloder sat alone at his desk waiting for darkness to fall. In front of him was a letter announcing his official award of an Iron Cross, First Class, Diamond Order. He smiled at it once more and then pushed the paper from him, towards the top of the desk. Everything was going so wonderfully well, so entirely beyond what he felt he could have managed by the force of will alone. Gloder was not a fanciful man, not a man given to belief in the power of an unaided providence, nor in the ineluctability of an individual’s ordained fortune. Gloder was a balanced man, he believed that somewhere between the two, between will and fate, existed the space in which a man might construct his future from the materials granted by destiny. Rudi believed himself also to be a generous man, one who, on recognising the talents he had been born with, had instinctively known that they were not his alone, to be wasted on cheap pleasure or crude self-advancement. Since he could remember, he had known that he must use his gifts to lead his fellow men, the vast mass of whom had none of his insight and knowledge nor a tenth of his powers of endurance, concentration and thought. In another man, such certainty might be regarded as arrogance, monomania even. In Rudi, they could be interpreted as a kind of humility. There were few men,

211

none certainly in this hell of war, to whom he could explain this. He had once tried to write it down. ‘Picture a man,’ he had written, ‘whose hearing is so acute that no sound escapes his ears. Every whisper, every distant roar, comes clear to him. Such a man must either be driven mad in the frenzy of noise that constantly assaults his brain, or he must devise ways of listening, ways of dividing the barrage of noise into patterns that he can understand. He must turn all these world sounds into coherent form, into a kind of music. ‘So it is with me: I see, hear, feel and know so much more than the generality of my fellow man that I have devised a system, a general music of the world that would be incomprehensible to anyone else, but which gives shape and structure to all that I understand. Every second of every day, new sensations and insights feed into this music and so it grows.’ He did not think it overweening or unrealistic to describe himself as so far above the common run of man. There were, of course, men he had met with sharper academic intellects. Hugo Gutmann, for example, had read more and was quicker in ways of abstract philosophical thought than Rudi. But Gutmann had no sense of people, no skill with the stupid, no ability (carrying on this musical metaphor) to sink himself into the rougher tunes of humanity, the swinging Bierkeller songs of the enlisted man or the sentimental ballads of the bourgeoisie. Besides, Gutmann was dead. There again, Gloder had met men more skilled in mathematics and the sciences than he could ever be, but such men had been devoid of any sense of history, imagination or fellow feeling. He had encountered poets, but such poets had no relish for facts, for figures or for the logical procession of pure ideas. Philosophers he had known or read, deep in their mastery of the abstract, yet such men had no knowledge of hunting the stag or setting the plough. What is the use of fixing the four hundredth decimal place of pi, or nailing the ontology of the human,

212

mind, if you cannot exchange talk with a countryman on the best time to bring down a herd from the high pastures or stand easily with a friend picking out whores? For that matter, what use is the common touch that allows you access to the hearts and minds of the masses, if you cannot also weep at the death of Isolde where human love stretches out into the finest point of pure Art and then attenuates further into spirit and transcendental nothingness? Such was Gloder’s view. He stood and went once more to the door that communicated with his little bedroom. Hans Mend was stretched out on the bed, his dumb eyes staring hard at the ceiling as though he were trying to recall a lost childhood memory or calculate a difficult sum. Gloder refused to berate himself for the stupidity of having left his diary in an unlocked drawer. The time one wastes in self-recrimination is better spent in learning. The mistake had not been fatal and would never be made again. Indeed, it might be turned to advantage. From now on his new diary (the old smouldered in the grate) would be a document that would welcome discovery. Rudi could also feel a kind of satisfaction in the intensity of Mend’s shock and betrayal. Such a deep sense of hurt could only come from one who had invested his whole heart and soul in a belief in Hauptmann Rudolf Gloder and his great worth. Mend was among the less stupid of the enlisted men, and if such a man could have sunk himself so entirely in worship, then how much more so would the Neanderthals in the other ranks? The moment itself had been almost entirely comic. ‘An entertaining read, I trust?’ Rudi had said from the doorway, choosing his moment to place the remark, as a comedian chooses the precise instant to drop his punchline. Hans jumped to his feet in stark panic like a schoolboy caught reading the filthy sections in the Greek Anthology.

213

‘Don’t you know that it is impolite to read a man’s diary without asking permission first?’ Poor Hans had stood there for what had seemed like a full minute, his mouth working and his face white with outrage and fear. In reality, Rudi knew, they had faced each other for no more than three seconds, but time misbehaves on these occasions. Even under such pressure, Rudi had taken a moment to consider the works of Henri Bergson and the operation of interior time. He had crossed over to Hans during this short moment and picked up the diary from the desk quite calmly. ‘I must apologise for any lack of artistic merit herein, my dear Mend,’ he had said in the tones of a tired gentleman- scholar. ‘The pressures of wartime, you know. It is not always possible to achieve the first style of literary elegance in the cannon’s mouth. I see that you are not in the least impressed.’ He had taken the diary, valuable tree-calf leather as it was and, his back to Mend all the while, dropped it into the fireplace, sprinkled paraffin all over and set a match to it. ‘A harsh critical judgement,’ he had sighed, still without turning to look at Mend, whose laboured breathing he could plainly hear behind him, ‘but no doubt a fair one.’ He stirred the burning pages with the tip of a highly polished boot and then turned to see Mend advancing on him, Luger in hand. ‘Devil!’ Mend’s voice rose no higher than a hoarse whisper. ‘I am not, I hope,’ said Rudi, ‘unduly attentive to the petty rules and protocols that bedevil our lives here. I do. feel bound to point out however, that the use of sidearms is reserved for the officer class. Rifles for men, pistols for officers. A foolish custom no doubt, but I feel one must cleave to these traditions, however regretfully, lest indiscipline break out like typhus all around us.’ ‘Don’t worry, Hauptmann,’ spat Mend. ‘This pistol is for you.’

214

The look of puzzlement on Mend’s face as he had squeezed the trigger was comical and - Rudi was not inhuman after all - rather pathetic. ‘Kaput,’ said Rudi, tapping the holster that contained his working Luger. Mend stood foolishly in the centre of the room, the trigger repeating its dull springing smack as his finger pulled and pulled. At length he dropped the pistol on the floor and stared at Rudi as if he were in a dream, all the fury drained from his face. Without a word, Rudi approached, both arms stretched out in front of him like a sleepwalker, or perhaps like a French Marechal preparing to offer a formal parade- ground embrace. His thumbs found Mend’s neck without resistance and pressed inwards on the throat with ease. Mend said nothing and his body made no move to protect itself. He had not the wit to bluster out a curse or scream for help. All the while his eyes, flooded with tears, were fixed on Rudi’s. The look in those eyes might have been disconcerting, shaming even, were it not for the passivity

-no, more than passivity - the longing, submissive welcome that was written there. The ganglions and sinews of his throat were soft and yielding as a woman’s breasts. In the moment of dying, his eyes protruded beyond their well of tears, but with the last forced breath they shrank back like swollen mud bubbles that have not enough force of marsh gas inside them to burst out. Rudi had laid the body on his bed, closed and locked the connecting door and then run from his office, clattering along the corridor, envelope in hand, huzzahing and bellowing with laughter. ‘Look what Stabsgefreiter Mend left on my desk!’ he had cried, bursting into Eckert’s office. ‘Where is he? When was he here? To the messenger the first nip of brandy!’ Eckert had remembered Mend arriving with the afternoon bag some two hours previously. ‘But never mind him,’ said the Major. ‘Congratulations to you, Hauptmann Gloder! And may I be permitted to say 215

that never have I enjoyed more the privilege of endorsing such a recommendation? I know that this goes for the Colonel also.’ Rudi had grinned bashfully and given a small, modest gulp. ‘Sir, you are too good to me. All of you, far too good to me. I hope, grand strategy allowing, I may be allowed to invite as many officers and men as can be spared to a celebration this weekend? Chez Le Coq D’Or? This award belongs to the regiment and the regiment should be rewarded. Officers and men alike.’ ‘You’re a good fellow, Gloder,’ said Eckert, ‘but may I suggest that while your comradely relationship with the other ranks does you nothing but credit, too much fraternisation doesn’t quite do in an adjutant? Especially,’ he added with an arch smile, ‘in an adjutant in line for promotion?’ ‘Herr Major!’ Rudi drew in his breath in amazement. ‘Well, well! It’s no secret that Staff Headquarters have had their eye on you for some time. Now, I know what you’re going to say …’ Eckert put up a hand to stop Rudi’s protest, ‘… you want to stay at the front, you want to be with the men. All very fine, but the fact is intelligent men with proven experience are sometimes more useful behind the lines.’ Towards the end of the day Gloder had climbed the stairs to his rooms. He had enquired earlier at the trenches for Mend but been told that he was absent, assumed to be on duty up the line somewhere. Messengers, after all, were never easily accounted for. So Rudi had returned, late in the evening, shoulder blades sore from congratulatory pats on the back, and given out two bottles of schnapps to the men in the guardroom before retiring for the night. He sat now at his desk therefore, the connecting door to the bedroom open and Mend’s stiffening body still staring upwards to the ceiling with grave concentration. ‘Dear, faithful Hans,’ said Rudi. ‘Your lamentable curiosity has deprived you of the chance of witnessing my greatest

216

hour of glory. In a few weeks I shall be Major Gloder, darling of the Staff. My days will be spent in a princely chateau, eating chocolate and moving little tin men around on maps until this foolish war is over. For the meantime, leave me in peace. I am rewriting my diary.’ At three in the morning, Gloder rose stiffly from his labours and went downstairs and into the kitchens. All was quiet as he slipped from the back door and into the yard outside. Rudi found a wheelbarrow and pushed it round to the side wall under his window. The nearest guard on watch duty would be around the other side of the fermier, almost certainly, if the kindly gift of celebratory schnapps had done its work, fast asleep in a drunken stupor. Upstairs again, Rudi slid open his desk drawer and rummaged inside. Next he went through to the bedroom, slung the dispatcher’s satchel about Mend’s shoulders and picked up the body, carrying it easily to the open window. He let it fall just next to the wheelbarrow beneath. Bones snapped like dry twigs as the corpse, now rigid in death, thumped into the ground. Wheeling his stiff, jagged cargo through the night and towards the duckboards of the Kurfurstendamm, Rudi felt like some miller selling sacks of flour in an old country village. He began to whistle softly to himself the rippling melody of Schubert’s arrangement of Die Schone Mullerin. He arrived at Mend’s dug-out, picked up the body and carried it in. ‘Who’s there?’ mumbled a voice in the dark. ‘Just me,’ said Rudi, calmly. ‘Returning a drunken Hans to his bed.’ ‘Thank God, sir. I thought it was reveille.’ ‘Not for another two hours. Go back to sleep. I’ll just dump him in his bunk and be gone.’ One of the broken legs stuck out sideways, but after a little effort the body was made to lie naturally enough on the bed.

217

Rudi left the dug-out and raised the heavy wooden wheelbarrow over his head onto the parados in front of him. He climbed up after it, wedging his feet in sandbags and, once at the top, turned to look down at the entrance to the dug-out below. It seemed an awful waste, he thought to himself. But then, war is an awful waste. Everyone knows that. He would write, he told himself as he took the Mills bomb from his pocket, the most beautiful and poetic letters to all the parents. As he ran back towards the fermier he thrust the wheelbarrow from him and sent it spinning away into the darkness. Its moment of crashing into a hedge coincided exactly with the thunderous detonation of high explosive behind him. Ancient History Implications The sight of Double Eddie had coincided exactly with a thunderous detonation of memory inside me like the eruption of an underwater volcano, and I needed to be alone with the molten flow of ideas that were beginning to rise and harden in my mind. An overblown image perhaps, but that was how it occurred to me. It was a comfort to make metaphors, however dippy. When your life is an empty space, holding fast to any picture rooted in the real world can help keep you from floating away. Steve had walked me through the campus towards Henry Hall, a little alarmed I guessed by the confrontation with Double Eddie and anxious to leave me and to return for a while to the sanity of his own life. He must have work to do after all, maybe a girlfriend with whom he could share his weird morning, perhaps he had even promised to report to Doctor Ballinger. ‘Listen,’ I said, turning to him as the Victorian Gothic ivy- clad stonework of Henry Hall came into view, a blessedly familiar sight in a strange world. ‘You’ve been incredibly

218

kind. This must have been very hard for you and I really appreciate it. I’ll go up now and get some rest.’ ‘Got your key?’ I dug into my shorts pocket and came up with it. ‘All safe,’ I said. He put a hand to my shoulder in awkward affection. ‘One day we’re gonna laugh like crazy about this,’ he said. ‘Absolutely,’ I agreed. ‘But I’ll never laugh about how kind and understanding you’ve been. Only a real friend could have been so patient.’ ‘Get outta here,’ he said, colouring and turning away. All very affecting really. I wondered where he was going and what he would say to those he met along the way. Back in the room, Room 303, my room, I returned to the bed I had woken up in and lay on my back staring up at the ceiling, carefully piecing together the thoughts that had returned to me. I knew now for certain that I was Michael Young, a history postgraduate from Cambridge. I knew too that last night, whatever ‘last night’ might mean, I had been in a laboratory in Cambridge - New Cavendish, that was the name - a laboratory where a physicist worked - a physicist called …? It would come to me. We had been playing with a machine … Tim.’ The machine was called Tim. T.I.M. Temporal Imaging Machine. But we had changed the meaning of the initials as Leo had worked on … Leo! You see, Pup? It’s all returning now. Leo it was. Leo Zuckermann. Leo and I had changed the meaning of the initials as we worked on the machine so that now they stood for Temporal Interface Machine, because we needed to send the pills … Pills! There had been a handful of little orange pills which Jane … Jane! Jane’s pills. They sterilised a male. Permanently. The water supply of the house in Brunau-am-Inn, Austria. We sent the pills there. To Brunau-am-Inn Brunau!

219

So much came flooding back I thought I would drown. Alois. Klara. The Meisterwerk. All completed, down to the last comma. My pigeon-hole stuffed with an envelope addressed to Leo Zuckermann. The car-park. Defacing the Clio. The briefcase bursting. The thesis flying. Leo picking up the papers. Making up with Jane. Spilling the pills. Meeting Leo for coffee. A hot, sticky meeting with Fraser-Stuart who hated my thesis. Leo showing me Tim. Auschwitz. Auschwitz. Leo’s father. Not Zuckermann at all. Bauer. I thought of Leo’s father, tattooing Leo and Leo’s mother. I thought of Jane. The tattoo on her arm, how she smacked me on my untattooed arm as I sent the pills flying. A tattoo on Jane’s arm? Can that be right? If time travel were possible someone would go back and make sure the Gallagher brothers were separated at birth and that Oasis were never formed. Is that what Jane said? Liam and Noel Gallagher were at Princeton now. Members of the Cliosophical Society, where Steve and Double Eddie punted all day to the sound of Wagner. Steve and Double Eddie, clad in ivy, embracing by the river bank. But my key has fallen from Steve’s pocket. It has fallen into the Cam and is tumbling to the bottom. I can see its silver turning and turning like a famous pancake tumbling through the currents of maple syrup. My key … my key, my key … ‘Mikey! Mikey! Wake up. Time to go.’ I sat up suddenly, the sheen of daytime sleep-sweat sticking the polo shirt to my back. Steve was looking down at me. ‘You okay, buddy?’ ‘Yes … yes. Fine. I’m fine.’ I stared about me at the bedroom and then at Steve. ‘Sure? You were having one hell of a dream there. Like, deep R.E.M., you know? Your bangs are stuck to your forehead.’ err s, 1 m sorry?

220

‘You’re sweating. I didn’t want to disturb you. But we gotta see this Taylor guy three o’clock.’ ‘No, no, really. I’m fine. Much better.’ I stood and pushed my feet into the Timberlands, trembling with a new excitement. ‘Well that’s grand.’ I took Steve’s arm. ‘There is one thing I need you to tell me though,’ I said. ‘However mad it sounds, will you just answer me one question?’ ‘Okay, try me.’ I looked into his eyes. ‘Tell me everything you know,’ I said, ‘about Adolf Hitler.’ ‘Adolf Hitler?’ ‘Yes, what do you know about him?’ ‘Adolf Hitler,’ he repeated slowly. ‘This is someone you know?’ ‘Never mind what I know,’ I almost screamed, ‘what do you know about him?’ Steve pondered, closing his dark blue eyes for a second so that the long lashes met, then opening them again as if he had come to a firm decision. ‘Nope. Never heard of the guy. He on the faculty? You need to see him?’ ‘Oh shit,’ I breathed. ‘Oh holy shit!’ I ran to the window and opened it. ‘Leo!’ I shouted to the campus, ‘Leo, wherever you are, we’ve done it! Jesus holy God, we’ve only fucking done it!’ I trod air through the campus. Every sight, every sound that came to me was new and perfect. This world around me glowed and shone with innocence, hope and perfection. If only I could get to Europe now! Check out London, Berlin, Dresden, all the buildings standing there whole, firm, unblitzed and all because of me. My God, I was a greater man than Churchill, Roosevelt, Gandhi, Mother Teresa and Albert Schweitzer rolled into one. Maybe I could track down Leo and see what he was up to. But Leo would not be Leo. He had only ever been Leo because his father had made him so in another life, in an

221

alternate, exploded reality. He was now … what was the name? Bauer! He was Axel Bauer, son of Dietrich Bauer, no doubt enjoying a guiltless, carefree German life somewhere while the real Leo Zuckermann, not cut short aged five in Auschwitz would be out there too, in Poland perhaps, practising as a doctor, musician, farmer, teacher or - who knows? - a wealthy industrialist providing work and security for thousands. I wondered why I was in America. My father, instead of joining the army, must have come with my mother to the United States before I was born. Well, I would see them and find out. I must get used to this new world. I had been in it, after all, for less than a day. So much to know. I must slowly grow accustomed to its ways. The old world was now nothing more than a freak construct in my head and in my head alone, a possibility that never happened, a turning never taken. The subject for a horror novel. Auschwitz, Birkenau, Treblinka, Bergen-Belsen, Ravensbriick, Buchenwald, Sobibor. What were they now? Small towns in Poland and Germany. Happy, silly little towns whose names were washed clean of sin and blame. ‘Have you visited the charming village of Dachau in Germany? Well worth a stop on the tourist route. Very handy for the grand old city of Munich. I would especially recommend the Hotel Adler. For those on a tour of Saxony and the north, don’t forget, after exploring Hanover, that the little hamlet of Bergen-Belsen offers the traveller old world charm blended with modern convenience.’ I giggled and hugged myself inside. My own fate, marooned in a new history was incidental. No one would ever believe what I had done or from what hellish historical roots I had emerged. How could they? Doctors would cluster about me and shake their heads at my unique style of amnesia. A strain of memory

222

loss that took the form of an accent change, for the Lord’s sake. An article or two perhaps in journals of neuropathology, maybe even an essay by Oliver Sacks in his next collection of psychological anecdotes: ‘The American Who Woke Up English’ or ‘A Hampshire Limey in the Court of Connecticut Yankees’. In time, my accent would become American and I would learn my history. What I had done would go unknown and unacknowledged. I imagined a scenario in Cambridge, in the bad old world. A man comes up to me and says: ‘Revere me. I stopped Peter Popper from being born.’ ‘Peter Popper,’ I say. ‘Who the hell is he?’ ‘Ha!’ this man replies. ‘Exactly! He was born in 1900 and caused death, disaster, cruelty and horror. He sent the century hurtling into an apocalypse of internecine strife and bestiality beyond imagining.’ ‘He did?’ ‘Yup, and I have just returned from stopping him from being born. Thanks to me London is still standing. Peter Popper levelled it with a bomb in 1950. I am the saviour of the century.’ Well, I mean to say … how would anyone react to talk like that? A pat on the head, some loose change and a hasty retreat. No, I should have to hug to myself and myself alone the knowledge of what I had achieved. Steve, leading me once more through the campus, smiled at my exuberance. ‘Guess that sleep did you good, right?’ ‘You can say that again. My God this place beautiful.’ is We walked on in silence, winding through lawns and courts, until we reached a large stone building on the edge of campus. Three young men were standing idly at the doorway watching our approach. ‘Oh gosh,’ said Steve under his breath. ‘What is it?’

223

‘It’s just the guys.’ ‘The guys?’ ‘Yeah. Scott, Todd and Ronnie. They were with us last night.’ The taller of them pushed himself off the wall against which he had been leaning and came towards me extending a hand. ‘Well, hellayl’ he said, in an excruciating English accent. ‘How are you, old bean, old crumpet?’ ‘Beat it, Todd,’ said Steve. ‘Urn, hello,’ I said. ‘So you’re Todd?’ ‘That’s right, my chap. I’m T-O-dd,’ he enunciated the short English ‘O’. ‘And this is Sc-O-tt and this is R-O-nnie.’ ‘Well,’ I said, attempting American, ‘hi there, Tahdd, Scahtt … Rahnnie.’ They laughed, but with awkward uncertainty. ‘I mean, like, this is a gag, Mikey, right?’ said Scott. ‘Well actually I’m afraid not,’ I said. ‘I expect Steve has told you all about it. I woke up this morning thinking I was English. I’ve been unable to remember much about myself. Weird I know, but true.’ ‘Yeah?’ ‘Mm-hm.’ ‘No shit,’ said Ronnie. ‘You trying to say you don’t remember no hundred bucks I lent you last week?’ ‘Asshole,’ said Steve, as they laughed at my discomfiture. ‘Come on guys, you said you’d leave us alone.’ ‘Hey,’ said Scott. ‘We roomed with this goofball for a whole fucking year. We got as much right as you to hang out with him now he’s nuts.’ ‘Only maybe we don’t have the same desire to be close to him, Burns, you know what I’m saying?’ ‘Look,’ I said, alarmed at Steve’s embarrassment. ‘I know it must seem really crazy to you. It’s all probably down to a bang on the head. My parents are English, so maybe that’s got something to do with it.’ Scott thumped me on the back. ‘We’re with you buddy. Just don’t expect me to ever buy you any more vodka again. Ever. You got that?’

224

‘Give ‘em hell, Mikey.’ Steve led me through them towards a door. ‘Just so long as you haven’t forgotten how to pitch your slider,’ said Ronnie as we went in. Jesus, I thought to myself. Baseball.’ I don’t know the first thing about baseball. And philosophy! I’m supposed to be majoring in philosophy. There are embarrassments ahead. ‘And don’t let them stick no electrodes in you now, y’hear?’ I almost laughed out loud when I came face to face with Simon Taylor. The sign on his door read ‘Professor S R St C Taylor’ and the bright outer-office, where his secretary sat in front of a computer, had led me to expect the kind of air-conditioned, relaxed, chino-shorts, hi-tec and ‘hi there!’ atmosphere that seemed to prevail around most of the campus. ‘Professor Taylor is expecting you,’ the secretary had said, indicating for me and Steve to be seated. ‘Would you like some water?’ ‘Thanks,’ I said. The secretary nodded and turned back to her computer. I looked at her in some confusion until Steve nudged me in the ribs and pointed at a large upturned flagon of water in the corner. ‘Oh,’ I said, getting up. ‘Right. Of course.’ Next to the water dispenser was a tube of conical paper cups. ‘Cool!’ I said. ‘I’ve seen these so many times in movies. Edward G Robinson, you know? You pour yourself a cup of water, there’s a great rumbling of air bubbles in the tank and then you have to drink the water down in one, screw up the paper cone and toss it in a bin. I mean, you can’t rest one of these cups on the table can you?’ The secretary stared at me and Steve shifted uncomfortably in his seat. ‘Just drink the water, Mikey,’ he said.

225

‘Oh. Right. Yes. For you?’ Steve shook his head and settled back to stare at the opposite wall. I enjoyed my drink of ice cold water, joined him on the sofa and together we inspected a framed poster of Vermeer’s Lute Player. After about ten minutes the door to Taylor’s office opened and the man himself appeared. That is when I almost laughed out loud. He was at least six-foot-five, wearing a linen three-piece suit, a striped college tie and an Alastair Sim air of baffled surprise. There was a briar pipe clamped between his yellow teeth and above it a thin strip of Ronald Colman moustache. His whole demeanour stank of some gin- soaked British club in Kuala Lumpur, or an adulterous Graham Greene outpost in colonial Africa. ‘Ah, gentlemen! And which one of you is Michael Young?’ Suppressing a grin, I raised a tentative hand and rose. He looked at me and nodded briskly. ‘And you must be Steven Burns, young man?’ ‘Yes, sir,’ said Steve. ‘Very good, very good. I wonder if you would be kind enough to hang on here for a while? I may ask you to come and join us later.’ ‘No problem, sir.’ ‘Perhaps Virginia might be good enough to hunt up a cup of coffee or a soda for you? Do help yourself to magazines and so forth. Good, good. So, if you’d like to come in, Mr Young, we can have a bit of an old chat.’ Taylor held open the door from the top, so I stepped under his arm and into the office, casting a rueful look at Steve over my shoulder. ‘Why don’t you sit over there, old man?’ The office walls were panelled in dark wood, with a desk in front of the main window. A dimpled leather chesterfield ran along one wall, and it was at this that Taylor pointed. ‘Do feel free to smoke. You won’t mind my old pipe, I hope?’

226

I shook my head and felt for the pack in my shorts. As he leaned forward to light a squashed Lucky I couldn’t help gasping out in surprise- ‘St Matthew’s!’ ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘That tie. You’re a St Matthew’s man.’ He nodded gently and shook out his match. ‘I have that honour.’ He pulled a chair from in front of his desk and set it in front of the sofa, settling into it slowly. ‘That’s not a tie many here recognise. Tell me what you know about the place.’ While I prepared an answer, he reached out a long hand and picked up a buff file from the desk and opened it. I was presented with a problem. There was no point that I could see, in my revealing all that I knew about Cambridge and England. So far as my record would show him, I was born and brought up in the United States. Any knowledge of the strange details of a collegiate university would be most unusual in an untravelled American. The natural show-off in me, however, wanted desperately to baffle him with my intimate understanding of all things English. It would be so hard for him to explain. Perhaps it would force him to believe in astral projection and out of body experiences. I was beginning to understand that I could have fun and power in this new world. ‘Well,’ I said. ‘It’s a Cambridge college, isn’t it?’ ‘You ever visited Cambridge, Michael?’ ‘Er, not exactly, but you know … I’m interested in English things. My parents and all … so I’ve read quite a lot.’ ‘Mm. You told Doctor Ballinger that you actually lived in Cambridge, I understand? Cambridge, England. And St Matthew’s was the college you mentioned.’ ‘Ah …’I screwed up my face. ‘You see, I woke up really confused this morning. I couldn’t remember anything. Anything at all.’ ‘You could remember how to speak.’ ‘Well, yes … obviously.’ ‘Obviously?’

227

‘Well, I mean, isn’t that usual with amnesia?’ He shrugged his shoulders. ‘You tell me, young fellow.’ We allowed a pause to develop. It seemed to me that it was a battle of wills. Taylor lost. ‘Tell me then,’ he said, ‘what you know about Cambridge generally. Everything that comes to mind.’ ‘Well, it’s the second oldest university in England. After Oxford, of course. It’s made up of colleges. Names like Trinity, King’s, St John’s, St Catharine’s, St Matthew’s, Christ’s, Queens’, Magdalene, Caius, Jesus, that kind of thing.’ ‘Spell “Magdalene” for me.’ I cursed myself and did so. ‘Good. Now spell “Caius”.’ Oh well, I thought. In for a penny … Taylor made a note on a pad. ‘And yet you knew they were pronounced “maudlin” and “keys”, didn’t you? ‘Well, as I say, I’ve read a lot about them.’ ‘I wonder which books? Do you remember?’ ‘Er, not really, no. Just books.’ ‘I see. And what about Princeton? What do you know about Princeton?’ I ransacked my mind feverishly for every nugget Steve had disgorged that morning when we had walked through the campus. ‘Nassau Hall,’ I said. ‘Named after Prince William of Orange-Nassau, though it could have been named after someone called Belcher, but he was too modest. Washington came there and signed the treaty of independence. No, that was Philadelphia, wasn’t it? Well, Washington did come here and it was the capital of the union for a time. We are allowed to fly the flag at night, something like that. There’s a gate you shouldn’t go through until you’ve graduated. The west end of campus is known as the Slums. Oh, you know, lots of stuff. Wawa Minimart. Sophomores. You know …’I gestured airily. ‘Where’s Rockefeller College?’ Er … ‘Dickinson Hall? The Tower?’

228

I gulped. ‘Excuse me?’ ‘And why, I wonder, did you say that Nassau Hall was named after Prince William of Orange-Nassau and might have been named after Jonathan Belcher?’ ‘Well, isn’t it true?’ ‘Yes, but you’re American, aren’t you?’ ‘That’s right,’ I said. ‘Sure. I’ve just gotten this silly accent in my head at the moment. But it’s going all the time, I can feel it.’ ‘But you see, an American would never say that something was named after someone, would they? They would say it was named for them.’ ‘They would?’ ‘It’s one of those slight little differences. Everyone knows about sidewalks and pavements, flashlights and torches, drapes and curtains. But “named after” and “named for” … it’s very extraordinary that your change of accent should also include so precise a change of idiom. Don’t you think?’ I spread my hands. ‘I guess it’s on account of my parents,’ I said. ‘I mean, they’re English after all. I probably picked it up from them, right?’ ‘Ye-e-s,’ he said doubtfully. ‘They’ve been here a long time, however and you were at High School and prep school in America, weren’t you?’ I sat dumbly, wondering where all this might lead. ‘So let’s talk about your parents then, shall we?’ I looked at the carpet. ‘Sure,’ I said. ‘What do you want to know?’ Taylor stood up and started to pace the room, fruitlessly lighting and relighting his pipe as he talked. ‘You know, this is all very peculiar, old chap. You’ve started littering the conversation with Americanisms like “I guess” and “gotten” and now you come up with “sure”, complete with a hard American “r”. You went to great lengths to persuade Doctor Ballinger that you were one hundred per cent British, as English as the white cliffs of Dover, raised in Hampshire and now you seem to be trying to convince

229

me that you’re as American as apple pie and that your proper accent is returning as mysteriously as it disappeared.’ ‘Are you saying you don’t believe me?’ ‘I’m just trying to understand, old fellow. It all seems just a trifle inconsistent, doesn’t it? Much better we have the truth don’t you think?’ ‘What is this, a police interrogation? I mean, damn it, I’ve met people here who know me. I’ve seen my driving licence … fuck it, my driver’s license, my rooms m Henry Hall, credit cards, the works. I woke up with a bump on my head and a weird accent. That’s all there is to it. I thought the idea was that you and everyone else told me the truth. I’m the one with the fucked memory. All I want is to be able to get on with my life.’ ‘That’s all you want? To forget this ever happened, get on with your life and finish your tripos?’ ‘Yes! Exactly. I mean, that’s what I’m here for, isn’t it?’ ‘And what are you reading?’ ‘Philosophy.’ ‘Well now you see I’m really, puzzled. No university in the world except Cambridge uses the word “tripos” to describe a degree course. And we at Princeton certainly do not use the word “read” to mean “study”. It’s all very difficult to understand.’ ‘Well bully for you, you’ve got a case study that can make your reputation. What’s the problem?’ ‘The problem, old chap, is that none of this makes sense.’ ‘So you think I’m lying? You think I’m trying it on? If so, great. Yes, you’re absolutely right. It’s all a con. A gag. A jape. A rag. Whatever the right word is. I’ve done it for a bet. I’m all better now. I’m as American as apple paah. You’re darn tooting, pardner, I’m a mean mothuh-fuckah ‘merican, and aah thiyunk, if it’s all the same to you, aah’ll be a-moseying along now apiece, thankee kahndly for your taahm, good suh.’ ‘Dear me!’ said Taylor, eyebrows raised once more in full Alastair Sim astonishment.





Unknown




230

‘And if it comes to peculiar,’ I added, ‘where the hell do you get off with all this “old chap”, “old fellow”, poker-upthe- arse business, hey? No real Englishman has talked like that for thirty years. You sound like a strangulated version of Peter Sellers in Dr Strangelove.’ ‘I beg your pardon?’ ‘Never mind,’ I said. ‘You won’t have the faintest idea what I’m talking about. I don’t suppose you’ve heard of Peter Sellers, have you?’ I could tell by his blank expression that he had not. I suddenly realised that there might now be whole swathes of movies that never existed, movie actors whom the war and circumstance had pushed into stardom in my world but were unknown here. Strangelove, The Longest Day … good God, Casablanca. There was no Casablanca! But then think … think of all the new movies from this world made in the last fifty years that I could catch up on. Christ! I could make a fortune. I could write Casablanca! Damn it I knew it nearly word for word, frame for frame. The Third Man! I could write that too … Stalag 17, The Great Escape, The Spy Who Came In From The Cold. Jesus … Taylor had stopped pacing the room and was once more seated in front of me, swinging his legs open and closed so that I could see the wrinkled, sweat-stained crotch of his linen trousers. ‘Now, listen to me Michael. I’m going to be absolutely straight with you. Fair enough?’ I pushed the dreams of screenplay glory from my mind and nodded cautiously. ‘I can’t pretend to you that I understand exactly what is going on inside your head. Hypnosis is one possibility, of course. Self-hypnosis another.’ ‘Are you suggesting that I … ?’ ‘I’m merely running through the possibilities, old chap. Someone may have hypnotised you, perhaps for a joke, perhaps for less savoury reasons. It may be that you have done this to yourself, accidentally or deliberately, it’s very

231

hard to tell. It may even be that you are not who you say you are.’ ‘What?’ ‘There are of course, various tests that we could undertake.’ ‘Surely it’s just the result of a bump on the head. I mean that happens, doesn’t it?’ ‘Not in my experience, Michael, no. I think the best thing for us to do is to keep you under observation for a while.’ ‘But I feel fine. It’s wearing off, I can feel it.’ ‘I don’t necessarily mean confining you to bed. If you would agree to submit to some tests over the next few days, I think I can guarantee that you will be allowed to remain at liberty. It may be better if you handed in your driver’s license, however. We wouldn’t want you wandering off. After all, I’m sure you can understand the … er, implications of all this?’ ‘Implications?’ I said, baffled to hell. ‘What implications?’ ‘It might be a good idea if we were in touch with your parents. You haven’t telephoned them yourself?’ ‘I don’t even know their …’I began, then stopped myself. ‘That’s to say, I don’t even know they’re at home at the moment,’ I said. ‘I mean, they’re probably at work. I didn’t want to worry them.’ ‘Nonetheless, I’m sure someone will be in touch. Now, if you wouldn’t mind waiting outside, I’d like a word with Mr Burns.’ I stopped myself just in time from asking who the creosoted fuck Mr Burns might be, realising he meant Steve, and walked dazed to the door, Taylor’s long arm around my shoulder and my driver’s license in his hand. Arrangements were made that the very next morning I would report to the Faculty of Psychology’s laboratories for testing. Meanwhile, Steve was lumbered with me once more. He seemed subdued on the way back through the campus. ‘What did he say to you?’ I asked.

232

‘Oh, nothing,’ he replied, ‘just asked me things. You know, how long I’d known you, stuff like that.’ ‘This is a real bore for you, isn’t it?’ I said. ‘You know, if you want to leave me alone, I’m sure I’ll be fine.’ ‘Can’t do it, Mikey. You’d get lost and it’d be my fault. ‘Sides,’ he added tactfully, ‘it wouldn’t be fair. You need someone.’ I considered this. ‘Thanks,’ I said. ‘I know I keep thanking you, but thanks anyway.’ He shrugged. ‘What did Taylor mean though,’ I asked, ‘when he said that there were “implications” to all this?’ Steve shook his head resolutely. ‘What say we talk about something else?’ I wanted to ask him so many things. I wanted to know about history. I wanted to know everything there was to know about the history of the last sixty years. Sixty-three years. European history since 1933. I wanted to know who the movie stars were, the rock stars, the President damn it. The President, the Prime Minister, everything. I realised such questions would freak him out so I stilled my tongue. I would slip away later and find a library. Firstly, I felt, I owed him something. ‘Hey, how about this?’ I offered. ‘How about we slide over to the Barrister and Alchemist and have ourselves a drink?’ ‘Alchemist and Barrister,’ he corrected mechanically. ‘Yeah, yeah. Whatever. I’m not saying, get hammered or anything. You never know, a little alcohol and I may just click out of it all and be my old self again.’ ‘Okay,’ he agreed. ‘But easy on the vodka.’ ‘Easy on the vodka,’ I promised, thinking of Jane and May Week parties. The Alchemist and Barrister was low and dark and inviting inside. The barman there seemed to know me and winked with the distant friendliness one gets to recognise in those who work in university towns. Students are all jerks, the wink seemed to say, but you

233

spend money and we know how to look as if we think you’re cool and interesting. Steve and I sat outside drinking pleasant English-style beer under a long canvas awning, watching people walk by. At the table next to us, two men in plaid short-sleeved shirts were looking at a map and arguing over walks. ‘I suppose you get a lot of tourists coming here?’ Steve shrugged. ‘A lot for New Jersey I guess.’ ‘Those two might see the map better if they took off their dark glasses,’ I said, blowing out a contented cloud of tobacco smoke. ‘But I suppose tourists are tourists everywhere.’ Steve nodded distractedly and took a sip of beer. ‘You’ll think I’m mad, I know,’ I said, ‘but I’m supremely happy at the moment.’ ‘Yeah?’ Steve sounded surprised. ‘How come?’ ‘You wouldn’t understand if I told you.’. Try me.’ ‘I’m happy because when I asked you earlier, you told me that you’d never heard of Adolf Hitler.’ ‘That made you happy?’ ‘You can have no idea what that means. You’ve never heard the names Hitler or Schickelgruber or Polzl. You’ve never heard of Brunau, you’ve never …’ ‘Brunau?’ ‘Brunau-am-Inn, Upper Austria. It’s not even a name to you and that makes me the happiest man alive.’ ‘Well that’s Jake for you.’ ‘You’ve never heard of Auschwitz or Dachau,’ I bubbled. ‘You’ve never heard of the Nazi Party. You’ve never heard of ‘Woah, woah,’ said Steve. ‘Okay, so I’m not like Mr Knowledge, but what do you mean I’ve never heard of the Nazi Party?’ ‘Well, you haven’t have you?’ ‘Are you nutsY I stared at him. ‘You can’t have done. It’s impossible.’

234

‘Oh sure,’ said Steve, wiping froth from his lips, ‘and I’ve never heard of Gloder and Gobbels and Himmler and Frick, right? Hey look out!’ Steve grabbed my wrist to straighten the bottle in my hand. A fizzing lake spread on the table between us and over the edge flowed drop after drop of dark cold beer. Political History Party animals ‘The Sternecker Brewery?’ Gloder repeated, striving to keep the contemptuous disbelief from his voice. Mayr smiled. ‘This is Munich, Rudi. Everything that happens in Munich has something to do with beer, you know that. Hoffman’s three thousand radicals met in the Lowenbrau. Levine began his April revolution in a beerhall, the unemployed Augsburg scum met in the Kindlkeller, the last of the Jew Bolsheviks were shot in a beerhall. It is only fitting, after all: the politics of this city run on beer just as the war ran on petrol.’ ‘And why should I spend a hot evening listening to yet another gathering of crankish professors and crazed Thulists?’ ‘Rudi, my department is short of men I can trust. I need reliable Vertrauensmdnner, spokesmen, observers and organisers who can talk sense to all these groups and spot the dangerous ones. Only last week there was an ex- corporal whose dependability I could have sworn to - Karl Lenz, Iron Cross with Oak Leaf, impeccable references from his Brigade Major. I needed a man to go to Lechfeld, which we believed to be Bolshevistically and Spartacistically contaminated … don’t scowl, that’s the current jargon, not my fault … so I sent this Lenz as part of an Aufkldrungskommando to speak about the Terms and explain the army’s views on political groupings. Turns out he was secretly some sort of Red himself. Lauterbach tells me he persuaded half the people gathered there that Lenin was a better bet than Weimar. You see the kind of thing I’m up against.’

235

Gloder put up a protesting hand. ‘All right, all right, I’ll go. I shan’t promise to enjoy myself, but I’ll go.’ ‘Find out who these people are, don’t address them or make them feel they’re being spied on. Just appraise them for me, find out what makes them tick, eh?’ So Rudi found himself later that evening, strolling along the Promenadestrafle and whistling to himself. He glanced amusedly at the slogans and drawings on the walls as he passed. ‘Rachel’ Yes, thought Rudi. Revenge. How politically acute. How mature. ‘Denkt an Graf Arco-Valley, ein deutscher Held!’ Rudi looked around him to the other side of the street and recalled that this had been the very spot where Count Arco-Valley had drawn his pistol and shot the Jew Communist Kurt Eisner dead with two bullets to the head. A cold day in February it had been, more snow on the ground than had been seen in Munich for decades. Rudi had been standing not far away and was nearly struck himself by one of the three retaliatory shots fired at Arco- Valley by Eisner’s bodyguard. Then he had found himself placed in the laughably ironic situation of being forced to help Eisner’s Jewish secretary keep at bay a band of Spartacists and assorted red scum who wanted to beat the wounded Arco-Valley to death there and then. Rudi had travelled with the dying Count in a battered police-van to a surgeon (another Jew) who had managed to keep the patient alive long enough to deliver his rambling speech of self-justification. ‘Eisner was the grave-digger of Germany. I hated and despised him with all my heart,’ Arco-Valley had spluttered. ‘Keep fighting the fight for the deutsche Volk, Gloder. The Fatherland needs men like us.’ Rudi had patted the dying man’s hand and uttered a string of noble Teutonic nothings to comfort him. He only knew the man slightly, they were both highly decorated war heroes, the grand ribbons on whose fraying greatcoats

236

were good for free beers in a now rapidly decreasing number of beer-cellars around Bavaria. The Count had done his glorious deeds on the Russian Front, Rudi in Flanders. Rudi never liked him however; he was one of those more-German-than-the-German Austrians who dripped with a sickly brand of mystical Pan-Germanism that Rudi found distasteful, like an overgenerous helping of Viennese Sachertorte. Arco-Valley had never overcome the bitter humiliation of being refused membership of the Thule Society on account of his mother being Jewish, a circumstance that amused Rudi hugely. The Thules had now conveniently forgotten this however, and Arco-Valley was just one more fading martyred bloom in the garden of ultra-rightist, anti-Semitic, nationalist remembrance. The volkisch groups, the Thules, the Germanen Orden and three dozen other frenzied groups each claiming that their infinitesimal variations in nuance and emphasis amounted to major planks of doctrinal difference. My God, it made the tower of Babel look like an Esperanto conference. Rudi walked past another message, painted in bright red letters two metres high. ‘Juden~Tod beseitigt Deutschlands Not!’ Well, maybe. Just maybe. It seemed to Rudi, however, that Germany’s pain needed more than the death of a few Jews to alleviate it. It needed Germany to grow up. Beneath the slogan he saw crudely daubed, dribbles of red paint dripping from each hook, the sacred Teutonic fire whisk, the Hakenkreuz that every soldier in Colonel Erhardt’s Second Naval Freikorps Brigade had been forced to paint on their helmets when they had marched down to crush the feeble self-styled Bavarian Soviet in the first week of May. It was the badge of every right-wing group in Germany. As the hammer and sickle to the Marxist, so the swastika to the nationalist. They had taken the place of the eagles as totems of allegiance.

237

Sweating in the late September heat, Rudi turned into the maze of little medieval streets that led eastwards into the old town. The meeting, it seemed, was being held in the beer- serving back room of Sternecker’s poky little brewery. Rudi’s heart sank. From what he could remember of this room, it would be unlikely to hold more than a hundred. This evening was going to be a bore. A bore conducted in the hot, sweet stink of malt and brewer’s yeast. There was an open book laid out on a small table by the door to the meeting-room. ‘What is this?’ asked Gloder, with a disdainful wrinkle of the nostrils. ‘Guest register, sir,’ said a ginger-headed, one-armed young man sitting at the table, nervously eyeing the medal ribbons on Rudi’s coat. Rudi signed his name and underlined it with a flourish. ‘Remind me of the name of this particular caucus?’ he said in a lazy drawl. ‘Pan-German People’s Party? National Workers’ Party? German National Party? People’s National Party? German German Pan-German German Party?’ The young man flushed. ‘The German Workers’ Party, sir!’ ‘Ah, yes, of course,’ murmured Rudi. ‘How foolish of me.’ The young man looked at the signature and sprang to his feet. ‘Forgive me, Herr Major!’ he said. ‘Colonel Mayr told us to expect you at seven. I had thought perhaps you were not coming after all.’ Rudi sighed, straightened the coat across his back - the night was hot, but he enjoyed wearing a greatcoat over the shoulders, arrogant Prussian style - and followed the young man slowly into the room. ‘The speaker is Herr Dietrich Feder,’ the young man whispered before bowing and leaving the room. Rudi nodded, dusted the seat of a wooden chair with a flick of his glove, sat down and looked lazily around him. There could not have been more than forty or fifty men present. And a woman too, Rudi noticed. He thought he recognised her as the daughter of a district judge.

238

Pleasant, round breasts, but a most appalling shortsighted, peering intensity. The gathering appeared to be giving Feder more attention than he deserved. Rudi knew him of old, a fanatic when it came to the subject of economics. He was peddling his bizarre concoction of warmed-over Marxism served up with standard anti-trade unionism and Jew hatred. Really, listening to political speakers these days was like watching a cheap circus show of mutated freaks. Wonder at the Leopard-Goat-Woman! Thrill to the Ape- Cat-Boy! Gasp at the Ambiguities of the Marxist Anti- Communist! Marvel at the contortions of the pro-Weimar Secessionist! There was a cheaply printed square of yellow paper on the floor which Gloder picked up and studied. If this flier were to be believed, he was listening to a talk entitled ‘How and By What Means Can One Abolish Capitalism?’ Rudi wondered idly if in fact this party, for all its right- wing paraphernalia and rhetoric, were not a cover for the Marxerei. There was no doubt that Moscow interested itself deeply in the internal politics of Germany. They were not above infiltrating even the smallest and meanest of political splinter-groups. And look at how they had sent Bela Kun into Budapest with a cadre of commissars, a roll of money and instructions to report by radio to Lenin personally. Almost overnight the Kirolyi government had collapsed and Hungary had entered the Bolshevik fold. Europe was a rotting corpse, ripe for the communist carrion-crow. Feder presented himself openly as a Socialist, but a nationalist, anti-Communist, anti-Semitic Socialist. Was this a Bolshevik ploy, or was there perhaps some real point here? He spoke without guile or apparent political savvy, but there was something in this melange of ideas that appealed to Rudi. Feder was making a distinction between what he called Good Capitalism, the capitalism of mines, railways, factories and munitions, and Bad Capitalism, the capitalism of financial dealing-houses,

239

banks and credit institutions: in short, the Capitalism of the German worker pitted against the Capitalism of the Jew blood-sucker. Rudi made a series of notes with a silver-cased pencil in his slim black notebook. ‘Investigate Dietrich Feder. Is he not the b-in-law of historian Karl Alexander von Miiller? Is he from same Feder family that worked for Prince Otto of Bavaria, later King of Greece? Known affiliations? Influence of Dietrich Eckart?’ He closed the notebook and listened with amusement as a new speaker arose, apparently a Professor Baumann, who after a few sentimental words of praise for Feder had started to argue passionately that Bavaria should secede from Germany and form a Jew-Free Holy Catholic Union with Austria. Rudi had promised Mayr that he wouldn’t speak, but this kind of nonsense could not go unchecked. He rose to his feet and cleared his throat. ‘Gentlemen! May I be permitted to speak?’ he said, and was gratified to note that an immediate silence fell. Turning to the judge’s daughter he executed a small bow and clicked his heels with a polite ‘Gnddiges Frdulein!’ It pleased him to see a small blush light up in the girl’s pale cheeks. It came into his head as he walked into the centre of the room that her name was Rosa, Rosa Dernesch, and he congratulated himself on the smooth working of his mind, that a part of it could isolate such a small detail while the rest was preparing a public address. ‘Permit me to introduce myself,’ he said, smiling politely as a rather confused Professor Baumann sat down, clearly with far more to say on the subject of Bavaria. ‘My name is Rudolf Gloder. You may see from this coat that I am an army major. I have been sent here to observe you by Colonel Mayr of the Bavarian Army propaganda unit. It is not in that capacity however, that I wish to address you, so …” he dropped his coat and officer’s cap to the

240

floor, ‘… now it is not a soldier who speaks to you but a German. A Bavarian as it happens, but a German.’ Rudi paused and looked around the room, taking in the eyes of those who watched him. Some regarded him with distrust, others with contempt, a few with sympathy and one or two with nodding approbation. He took a deep breath and then roared at the top of his voice. ‘WAKE UP! Wake up, you complacent fools! How dare you sit here and talk away the future of Germany? WAKE UP!’ The volume of his voice startled everyone into shocked amazement, Rudi included. One old man in the corner had taken his words quite literally and woken up with a dribbling, coughing start, and was now staring around in panic, as if afraid that fire had broken out. Rudi pulled down his tunic and cleared his throat. A huge buzzing bolt of energy, excitement and joy was surging though his body, as if he had taken a great pinch of cocaine, as cavalry officers in the Habsburg regiments used to do before a charge. He was fully aware, as he spoke, of every detail of every face he looked into and felt a massive sense of power and ease. ‘Herr Feder talks of the Jews in the banks and the Jews in Bolshevik Russia,’ he said in a quieter voice, almost a whisper, but one which he knew with confidence carried into every ear in the room. ‘He pours his scorn upon them with eloquence and with erudition. But I wonder how the Jews respond to this? Are they trembling in fear? Are they packing their bags to leave? Are they falling at our feet craven with apology and erupting with humble promises to mend their ways? No, they are LAUGHING, my friends. They are laughing up their gabardine sleeves. ‘And what has Professor Baumann, with all respect to that learned gentleman, what has he to say to this? He says Bavaria must leave Germany and join with Austria. Do I need to give you a history lesson? Do I need to remind you what we all heard on the ninth of May? Do I? Do I? Every German colony in Africa and the Pacific to be given

241

up. No discussion, no appeal. Thirteen per cent of German territory in Europe to be eaten up by other nations. Non-negotiable. Prussia cut in two by a corridor to the Baltic Sea. Danzig to be given to the Poles. No argument. Two hundred thousand tons of shipping a year to be built in German yards and given, given to our conquerors. And money? How much money? A blank cheque. Reparations to be paid on a sliding scale. The more prosperous we become, the more we pay. Every drop of sweat’ that flies from the exhausted brow of every German worker is to join in the great torrent that will flow abroad to our enemies while we struggle in our parched desert of shame. All guilt, all blame for the war to be accepted by us, the German nation. Der Dolchstofi, it has been called, this dagger that the Hagens of Berlin have stuck into Siegfried’s proud back, with the help of Levien, Levine, Hoffman, Egelhofer, Luxemburg, Liebknecht and the other Jews, Communists and traitors. ‘And what is Baumann’s answer to this catastrophe? The greatest catastrophe that has faced any nation in the history of our earth? That Bavaria, proud Bavaria, should run cringing from under Germany’s skirts and slip between the sheets with the barren, shrivelled whore Austria, while the Holy Father, like some overblown brothelkeeper, looks on in glee and blesses the bastard issue of this harlotry, this craven fornication? ‘That is a solution? That is Realpolitiki ‘GROW UP! GROW UP and WAKE UP! Our enemies are laughing and dancing in delight even as we weep and thrash in our childish tantrums. ‘Yet there is an answer to our ills, you won’t like it, but it lies before us. There is one solution, one hope, one certain path to German pride and German survival. You know what it is, you all know what it is. ‘It is the disbandonment of parties like this. Wait! Before you tear me to pieces, before you howl me down as infiltrator, saboteur, agent provocateur and traitor, listen

242

to what I have to say. It is one word. Exactly one word. The one word. The one word. The one word is- ‘Unity! ‘Yes, we can splinter ourselves into petulant little groups like this German Workers’ Party of yours, we can refine and refine on political theory and economic theory and racial theory and national theory all we like and call ourselves clever and call ourselves patriots. We can sharpen our ideas until the razors of our minds are blunted. But the more we scrabble at straws, the more we howl at the moon, then the more our enemies gloat and giggle and grin. ‘There are more than fifty separate political parties in Munich alone, most of them far larger than this one. Think about that. Thmk about that and weep. ‘Look at Weimar. In their water-willed desperation to lick the arse of Woodrow Wilson, they have a government of such liberal benevolence, such magnanimity, that it too is comprised of dozens of different parties, each allowed a say in our national policy. Think about that and weep. ‘But think now about one German party. Imagine such a thing. A single German party for the single German worker, farmer, housewife, veteran and child. A single German party that speaks with one single German voice. Think about that and laugh. For I tell you now, with all the power of prophecy and love of fatherland, I tell you now that such a party can rule not only Germany, but the whole earth. ‘Shall I tell you how I know that I am right? There is an old rule of soldiering, of politics, of chess, of card-play, of statecraft, of all sorts and forms of engagement. ‘Do not do what you most want to do: do only what your enemy would least like you to do. ‘We know our enemies: the Bolshevik Jews, the Financial Jews, the Social Democrats, the liberal intellectuals. ‘What would they like us to do? ‘They would like us to argue amongst ourselves as

243

to who has the purest German soul, who has the best economic plan, who has the cleverest ideas, who speaks most for the average German. ‘If we do that, they are happy, our enemies. The disaffected worker will find nothing in his politicians but schism and dissent, so he will join the Moscow-backed trade unions. The interest payments will keep rolling into the Jewish banks, Germany will still be in their grip. ‘But what would our enemies least like us to do? ‘To speak with one voice. To emerge, as one German people, in one party, to control our own destiny. To look after our own workers. To develop our own engineering, science and national genius to one aim, the emergence of Germany as a powerful modern state, dependent upon no one but its own people for its future. ‘The Bolshevik Jew is denied influence. The financial Jew is shown the door. The liberal intellectual and the social democrat are shamed out of existence. ‘All it takes is unity. Unity, unity, unity. ‘But it will never happen, will it? It will never happen, because we all want to be the king rooster of our own little dunghill. We will fail to do the one thing we need to do. ‘Because it is hard. So hard. It will take patience and work and planning and sacrifice. It will take unity within to create unity without. It will take a massive effort of organisation. ‘I know the kind of unity the German is capable of. I have seen it and shared its sacred power in the trenches of Flanders. I know the kind of disunity the German is capable of. I am looking at it now in a smelly back-room in Munich. ‘Those are our choices. To divide and weep, or to unify and laugh. ‘Myself, I am a Bavarian. I love laughter. ‘There! I have had my say. Forgive me. In recompense, allow me to buy a glass of beer for every man here.’

244

Rudi bent to pick up his greatcoat, threw it back over his shoulder and returned to his seat. The silence before the ovation reminded him of the breath-held pause that followed the final notes of Cotterddmmerung the first time he went with his father to the Bayreuth Festival. He had thought for a terrible moment that the audience had disapproved and that they were going to leave the theatre in silence. But then had come the applause. So it was now. A man, perhaps ten years older than Rudi, pushed himself forward ahead of the others, extending a pink- jacketed pamphlet. ‘Herr Gloder,’ he shouted above the cries of Einheit! Einheit! and the stamping of feet. ‘My name’ is Anton Drexler. I founded this party. We need you.’ Modern History Firestone ‘I need you Steve. You have to help me find a library.’ Steve dropped some dollar bills onto the beer-sodden table and hurried after me. ‘Jesus man, what has gotten into you?’ ‘Where’s the nearest?’ ‘Library? God’s sake, this is Princeton.’ ‘Any good one will do. Please!’ ‘Okay, okay. There’s the Firestone on campus, just across the street.’ ‘Come on then!’ We ran past a post-office, up the side of Palmer Square and into Nassau, across which I hurled myself without a sideways glance. ‘Heck, Mikey. You ever hear of jay-walking?’ ‘I’m sorry, but I have to know.’ The Firestone Library was a gaunt, stone cathedral of a building, crowned by a huge tower finned with sharp buttresses that launched up from the roof like a rocket. I stood in the doorway and turned to Steve. ‘This has everything?’

245

Steve shook his head with something approaching despair. ‘Mikey,’ he said. ‘There’s over eleven million books on campus and most of them are here.’ ‘And I’m allowed to use it?’ He nodded with glum resignation and pushed open the door. ‘History,’ I hissed to him as we walked towards a massive central desk. ‘Where’s Modern European Histo-tff 1 think maybe we’d better reserve a carrel,’ was his response. ‘A what?’ ‘You know, a carrel …” I shook my head in puzzlement. ‘A room,’ said Steve irritably, plucking a white paper slip from the desk. ‘A private room for reading. A carrel. What the hell else do you call them?’ After half an hour’s bureaucratic delay and whispered shelf-raiding we found ourselves in one of these carrels: a small, square room equipped with a desk, a chair and handsome prints of eighteenth century Princeton on the walls. On the table in front of me lay our hoard of twelve books. I sat down, picked up a ‘Chronicle of World History’, took a deep breath and turned to H for ‘Hitler’. Nothing. ‘You don’t have to stay,’ I said to Steve over my shoulder. ‘That’s okay,’ said Steve, who was settling himself in the corner in a lotus position, a pictorial book of military history laid out from knee to knee. ‘Hey, I might even learn something.’ Maybe he did learn something. I was too engrossed to pay much attention. I turned to N for Nazi and after staring for a while at this strange new name, to G for ‘Gloder’. My fingers scrabbled at the paper, peeling back page after page of the entry, to see how much was given over to this one man. Seventy pages, listed under different headings, each contributed by a different historian. The first entry pronounced itself to be a chronological biography.

246

Gloder, Rudolf. (1894-1966) Founder and leader of the Nazi Party, Reich Chancellor and guiding spirit of the Greater German Reich from 1928 until his overthrow in 1963. Head of State and Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, Fiihrer of the German Peoples.’ Born Bayreuth, Bavaria on 17 August, 1894, the only son of a professional oboist and music-teacher, Heinrich Gloder (q.v.) and his second wife Paula von Meissner und Groth (q.v.), the young Rudolf was encouraged by his mother, who considered that she had married beneath herself, to believe that he came of aristocratic stock. Much has been written about Paula’s connections with the German and Austrian aristocracy (see: Gloder: the Nobleman, A L Parlange, Louisiana State University Press, 1972; Prince RudolfP Mouton and Grover, Toulane, 1982, etc.) but there is little real evidence to show that his background was anything but that of a typical middle-class Bavarian family of the period. In later life, when ascending to power, Gloder went to great lengths to stress the ordinariness of his formative

years, even hinting at years of poverty and hardship, but these claims bear as little inspection as his later claims of descendancy from a Habsburg line. As a child there is no doubt that the young Rudolf was a considerable prodigy, proving himself an accomplished musician, equestrian, artist, athlete and swordsman. He was able to read and write in four languages, as well as the obligatory Latin and Greek expected of any Gymnasium student, by the time he was fourteen. Such contemporary accounts as can be trusted show that he was popular with his school-fellows and teachers and the papers relating to his admission to the military academy at Munich in 1910, when he was sixteen, offer glowing testimonials to the high esteem in which he was held by all who knew him. At the outbreak of the Great War in 1914 Gloder joined the 16th Bavarian Infantry Reserve Regiment as an

247

enlisted man, a decision which distressed his mother and puzzled many of his friends. His own account of his wartime experiences (Kampfparolen, Munich 1923, ‘Fighting Words’ trans. Hugo Ubermayer, London 1924) a masterpiece of false modesty and glamorous self- romanticization, makes the claim that he wished to fight shoulder to shoulder with ordinary Germans. There can be no question, certainly, that had he joined as an officer in any of the smarter regiments which would have welcomed a cadet of such impressive qualifications, he would never have been able to match the unexampled achievement of his giddy rise through the ranks from Private Gemeiner to full Staff Major, collecting on the way, amongst other decorations, the Iron Cross, First Class, in the Oak Leaf and Diamond orders. I lowered the book for a moment and stared at the wall facing me. The i6th Bavarian Infantry Reserve. The Regiment List. Hitler’s regiment. The Germany to which Gloder returned late in 1918 following the signing of the I Ith November Armistice was a nation in political uproar. Assigned the role of Vertrauensmann by Colonel Karl Mayr of the Bavarian Army Propaganda Unit, with a brief to keep an eye on the scores of burgeoning right-and left-wing political organizations springing up almost daily in the political- vacuum left by Munich’s abortive revolution of April 1919, Gloder attended in the September of that year a meeting of the fringe ultra-right faction, the Deutsche Arbeiterpartei, the German Workers’ Party, led and founded by Anton Drexler (q.v.), a 36-year-old railway yard toolmaker. Although numbering fewer than fifty members, Gloder saw the DAP’s apparently self- contradictory blend of anti-Marxist socialism and anticapitalist nationalism as containing exactly the right ingredients for a party of national unity. Within six months Gloder had cut off all official contact with the Reichswehr, resigned from Mayr’s propaganda unit, joined the DAP,

248

ousted the ‘National Chairman’, a Thule Society agitator named Karl Harrer (q.v.) and elbowed aside Drexler himself to assume full leadership as Fu’hrer or leader of the party. In 1921, he added the prefix Nationalsozialistisch to the DAP’s official title. Despite his loathing of socialism and labor unions, Gloder recognised the need for his party to attract ordinary working men who might otherwise be drawn into Marxism and Bolshevism. The NSDAP rapidly acquired, from the German pronunciation of the first four letters of its title, the universally applied sobriquet ‘Nazi’, claiming for its own the Hakenkreuz or swastika as its proprietary symbol, much to the disgust of other right-wing groups who had used it since the previous century in their literature and street banners. Gloder’s greatest gifts, in the early days of the party, were of organization and of demagoguery. Known for his ready, caustic wit, early rivals dismissed him as a comedian, but he was able to turn the unkindly meant nicknames of Gloder, der ulkige Vogtl, or Rudi der Clown, into weapons of rhetorical attack against his enemies. There is no question however, that it was his charm that won him the most friends and the steady stream of new recruits from all classes of society to the party, that by the early 1920s had swelled to a flood. Naturally endowed with good looks, an athletic bearing and a movie star smile, Gloder’s ability to cultivate the admiration and trust of natural political enemies was legendary. The industrial and military classes had faith in him, the ordinary man admired and envied him and women all over Germany (and beyond) openly worshipped him. Organizationally, he grouped the party into sections which were to deal with issues that he considered critical to the achievement of the growth of this fledgling party and the wider growth, when the time came, of greater Germany herself. Propaganda was of huge importance and the recruitment to the party of Josef Gobbels (q.v.), an academic

249

Rhinelander of strict Catholic upbringing who had been rejected for war service on account of a polio-crippled leg, could not have been more timely. Gobbels’ fear of being considered a ‘bourgeois intellectual’ and his own sense of physical inferiority had led him to formulate a sentimental mythology of blond Nordic purity and manly Spartan virtues: in Gobbels’ eyes, Rudolf Gloder was the physical, spiritual and intellectual embodiment of all these Aryan ideals and from their first meeting, Gobbels’ considerable gifts of oratory and his natural, modern grasp of the techniques of newsreel and radio, were placed entirely at his Fuhrer’s service. Propaganda was for Gloder the means to achieve and maintain political power, but over the years he came to the view that an almost equal significance lay in the potential of science, engineering, and technological innovation. Swallowing his natural anti-Semitism, Gloder went out of his way to court the physicists of Gottingen University and other centers of scientific excellence, where developments in atomic and quantum physics were reaching far ahead of any comparable institutions outside Germany. It was Gloder’s belief, prophetic as it turned out, that the good faith of the scientific community was essential for the future of Germany. This firmly held view ran counter to the instincts of ideologs such as Dietrich Eckart, Alfred Rosenberg and Julius Streicher (q.q.q.v.) and even his close friend Gobbels who believed, with the others, that ‘Jew Science’ could only pollute a new Germany. Dietrich Eckart, the title of whose poem Deutschland Erwacbe! became the first slogan of Nazism, had helped fund the purchase of the Vdlkischer Beobacbter, the official newspaper of the NSDAP, but fell out with Gloder over what he now saw as his leader’s soft-pedalling tactics against the Jews and the two never spoke again before Eckart’s death in 1923. At the time of Eckart’s funeral, Gloder complained to Gobbels that Eckart never understood that to frighten the Jews away early would be

250

a tactical error. (Am Anjang, Rudolf Gloder, Berlin 1932, ‘My Early Life’, trans. Gottlob Blumenbach, New York 1933) Gloder would use anti-Semitism amongst the workers as a unifying slogan, but not at the expense of wasting the vital resources of Jewish science and banking. In secret meetings with the Jewish community throughout his early years, meetings of which even his most trusted allies were unaware, Gloder was able to convince prominent Jews that his party’s anti-Semitism was public posture and that Jews in Germany had less to fear from him than from the Marxists and other rightist factions. Gloder’s third plank of policy in these early days was to organize an inner cadre, under the ruthless leadership of Ernst Rohm (q.v.), which used violent techniques of street-fightina and intimidation to frighten off opponents and to quell heckling and counter demonstrations from the left. Although these lawless squads of ex-servicemen and unemployed manual workers inspired fear and contempt in the liberal intellectuals of the time, Gloder managed privately to disavow and deprecate, to those who mattered, the brutal methods of his own party. He personally made friends with many writers, scientists, intellectuals, industrialists and jurists for whom Nazism seemed anathema, apparently convincing them that the tactics of Rohm, the party’s second-m-command and Gloder’s personally appointed deputy, were a temporary expedient, a price worth paying for the defeat of communism. At the same time, Gloder travelled regularly and extensively, visiting France, Britain, Russia and the United States, making great use of his linguistic gifts and charm of manner. Although during this period (1922-1925) the Nazi Party had not run in a single election, it had grown within four years to become, after the Social Democrats (q.v.) and Communists, the third largest party in Germany and a real force to be reckoned with. Gloder’s journeys abroad, in his famous red Fokker

251

airplane (trading none too subtly on the universally respected image of Baron von Richthofen with whom he also later claimed kinship) were designed to demonstrate to the world and to Germans back home that he was a reasonable, civilized man, a man of culture and statecraft who cut a credible figure on the world stage. He explained to those foreign politicians who would receive him (and there were many) that he could not put his party up for election until he was able to ameliorate the terms of the Versailles Treaty (q.v.). In this way he outflanked the Social Democrats, forged links with power-brokers in Europe and America and made a name for himself in the international arena at a time when Germany was an almost entirely inward- looking nation, still dealing with the shame of military defeat and the humiliation of the enforced peace. During these years of travel, Gloder appeared in a Hollywood silent picture, guying his own reputation for oratory and wit (The Public Speaker, Hal Roach, 1924), played golf with the Prince of Wales (q.v.), danced with Josephine Baker (q.v.), climbed the Matter-horn and forged many friendships and alliances which were to prove crucial in the years to come. In 1923 Gloder repelled the advances of Erich Ludendorff (q.v.) whose dreams of power encompassed the dismantling of the Weimar Republic (q.v.) and the installation of a military-style junta in its place. Ludendorff had attempted to seize power once before in Berlin during the abortive Kapp putsch of 1920 and Gloder distrusted the veteran General’s political judgement. He distrusted even more the extreme forms of paranoia against Freemasonry, Jesuitism and Judaism exhibited by Ludendorffs insistence that ’supranational powers’ had caused the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand (q.v.) in Sarajevo as well as the military defeat of Germany in 1918. The General had even gone so far as to claim that both Mozart and Schiller had been murdered by ‘the grand Cheka of the supranational secret society’. Gloder gave

252

orders that no Nazi should assist Ludendorff in this new attempt to take the reins of power and it is probable he tipped off the Weimar authorities in November when, at the head of an army of barely two hundred, Ludendorff rode into the center of Munich from the Biirgerbraukeller, to be summarily arrested on a charge of treason. This ability on the part of Gloder to wait for the right moment was best tested five years later in 1928, when he once more refused to allow the NSDAP to run in the national elections. He persuaded the upper echelons of his party that they could not expect to win such an election and that even were they to do so, the economic conditions were not propitious. An element of prosperity was entering German life and the Social Democrats were riding high in public opinion. It was far better to exercise patience and to wait. A few months later, the Wall Street Crash (q.v.) and the onset of the Great Depression (q.v.) was to prove the acumen of this political judgement. Hjalmar Schacht, Fritz Thyssen, Gustav Krupp, Friedrich Flick (q.q.q.q.v.) and other wealthy German industrial magnates quickly gauged the incompetence of the Social Democrats in the face of this unprecedented world slump and began to pour money into the coffers of Gloder’s Nazi party, by now convinced that only he possessed the necessary combination of sophisticated statecraft and popular backing to lead Germany out of its spiraling economic crisis. By the Fall of 1929, with hyperinflation rampant and unemployment reaching epidemic proportions it was clear that … ‘Christ, Mikey, how much longer are you gonna be?’ I looked up, startled. ‘What time is it?’ ‘Damn near six o’clock.’ ‘Hell, I’ve only just begun. Can I take these books away with me?’

253

Steve shook his head. ‘Not the reference stuff, not the encyclopaedias and all. They have to stay on site. Guess you can take out these okay …’ He went to the table and picked up two smaller books. Textbooks on European History. ‘I’ll take them then,’ I said and stood and stretched. ‘Christ I’m sorry. You must have been so-o-o bored, Steve. Why didn’t you go? I reckon I know my way back to Henry Hall by now.’ Steve tucked the books under his arm. ‘I’ll tag along,’ he said. ‘Honestly, you don’t have to.’ He looked down at the carpet, embarrassed. ‘Fact is, Mikey …’ ‘What?’ ‘See, Professor Taylor, he told me not to let you out of my sight.’ ‘Oh,’ I said. ‘Yes. I see. Thinks I’m dangerous, does he?’ ‘Maybe he figures you might get lost. You know, get yourself into trouble, do yourself some more damage.’ I nodded. ‘Well, it’s awful for you. I’m sorry.’ ‘Hey, will you do me a favor? Will you stop apologising all the time?’ ‘It’s an English habit,’ I said. ‘We’ve so much to be sorry for.’ ‘Yeah, right.’ As I opened the door into the corridor, Steve stopped. ‘Gee! I just had a thought. Does it have to be books?’ cry +,* 1 m sorry? ‘How about carts?’ ‘Carts?’ ‘Yeah, if you wanna study history you can take out carts.’ ‘I don’t want to sound stupid,’ I said, ‘but what the hell is a cart?’ Ten minutes later we were walking out of the Firestone building, two borrowable library books and a stack of carts under my arm.

254

‘So,’ said Steve. ‘You going to tell me what this is all about? This sudden need to know all about the Nazi Party?’ ‘I wish I could tell you,’ I said. ‘But I know you’d just think I was mad.’ Steve stopped and considered for a moment. ‘Here’s what we do. See that building over there? That’s the Chancellor Green Student Center. We go in. We pick up some pizzas and some donuts and some soda and whatever stuff else we feel like and we take it back to your place. Then you tell me everything that’s in your mind. Deal?’ ‘Deal,’ I said. I was relieved to arrive back at Henry Hall. The sight of so many students in the Rotunda at the Student Center had unnerved me, reminded me of how adrift I was, how alienated. The particularities of foreign food, foreign ways of serving it, foreign money, foreign shouts and calls, foreign laughing, foreign smells and foreign looks … they had hemmed me in on all sides until I wanted to scream. My room in Henry Hall, so strange to me this morning, now took on all the comfort and familiarity of an old pair of docksiders. We dumped the brown paper bags of food onto the desk by the window. It was still light, but I wrestled with the blind-rod until the slats closed and switched on a lamp. There was a feeling I had, a hunted feeling, a need to nest down. As we champed on our wedges of pizza I looked up at the walls. ‘These people here,’ I said, pointing to a poster. ‘Who the hell are they?’ ‘You kidding?’ ‘No, really. Tell me.’ ‘They are the New York Yankees, Mike. You take a train to Penn Station to watch them play most every time you can.’ ‘Oh, and them?’ ‘Mandrax.’

255

‘Mandrax,’ I repeated. ‘They’re a band, right?’ ‘They’re a band.’ ‘And I like them do I?’ . Steve nodded with a smile. ‘They look like the saddest load of old farts I’ve ever seen,’ I said. ‘Are you sure I like them?’ ‘Sure/ he nodded. ‘They’re neat.’ ‘Neat are they? Well, if they’re neat I must be crazy about them. I happen to love neat. How about the Beatles? Do I like them? The Rolling Stones? Led Zeppelin? Elton John? Blur? Oily-Moily? Oasis?’ I laughed with pleasure at his blank stare. ‘Christ, I am going to make a killing’ I giggled. ‘Here, listen to this. Ha-hem! Yesterday? all my troubles seemed so far away! Now it looks as though they’re here to stay. Oh I believe in yes-ter-day. What do you reckon?’ ‘Ouch!’ said Steve, his hands over his ears. ‘Mm, you have to hear the harmonies, I suppose … what about this, then? Imagine there’s no heaven …. No, you’re right, you’re absolutely right. I’ll need some time alone with a synthesiser.’ I stood and walked around the walls. ‘Who’s this then?’ ‘Luke White.’ He s a singer? ‘Get outta here! He’s a movie star.’ ‘Hm, rather cute, isn’t he? Why’ve I got him up on my wall?’ ‘That’s what a lot of people would like to know,’ Steve said and then turned a furious shade of red. As he tried to cover up his confusion by concentrating on the interior of a donut, a thought that I had been carrying at the back of my mind forced itself upon me. ‘Um, Steve. This is going to sound like a really stupid question, but I’m not gay am I?’ Steve frowned. ‘Gay? Sometimes, I guess. Sure.’ ‘No, no, you misunderstand me. Am I … you know, like … um, you know … ?’ ‘Huh?’

256

‘You know! Am I … a fairy? Queer?’ Steve went absolutely white. ‘Fuck’s sake, Mikey!’ ‘Well, it isn’t so strange a question, is it? I mean, you know. You said I didn’t have any girlfriends. And then I thought, well, these posters … I just, you know … wondered, that’s all.’ ‘Jesus, man. Are you crazy?’ ‘Well, I know I never used to be, in Camb … in my memory, that is. At least I don’t think I was. Particularly. You know … any more than normal. I had a girlfriend, but frankly, it was a pretty weird relationship in some ways. She was older than me and it was as much convenience as anything, sharing a house, that sort of thing. I mean I loved her and everything, but I often used to envy James and Double Eddie slightly. Perhaps all the time I was … hell, I just wondered, you know. I expect it’s normal. No big deal.’ Steve was staring at his Coke can as if it held the secret of life. ‘No big deal?’ he said unsteadily. ‘You shouldn’t talk like that, Mikey. You’ll go getting yourself into trouble.’ ‘Into trouble? You talk about it as if it’s a crime. I mean, all I’m asking is, am I now, or have I ever been … oh my God!’ I broke off abruptly, the rhythms of that old McCarthyite mantra causing a sudden terrible understanding to dawn. ‘It is, isn’t it? It’s a crime!’ He turned to me and I could almost believe that there were tears in his eyes. ‘Of course it’s a fucking crime, you asshole! Where the hell have you been living?’ ‘Well that’s just it, Steve,’ I said. ‘That just it. You see, where I come from it isn’t a crime.’ ‘Oh, right. Sure. Like on Mars, in the valley of the Big Rock Candy Mountain where marshmallows grow on the candy-cane trees and everybody skips and jumps and bakes cherry pie for strangers.’ I couldn’t think of anything else to say. Steve finished the Coke, pressed the sides of the can in with his thumbs and fumbled for a cigarette.





Unknown




257

I lit one too and cleared my throat, hating the silence. ‘I assume that we’ve never … that is … the two of us …’ He glared at me furiously. ‘Mm. I’ll take that as a no then.’ He leaned forward in his chair and looked down between his legs at the carpet, his hair flopping straight down and obscuring his face. Once more silence reigned. ‘Look Steve,’ I said. ‘If I told you that I did come from Mars, you’d think I was mad, wouldn’t you? But suppose, just suppose I came from … another place, just as strange, from a culture quite different from your own?’ Steve said nothing, just continued to scrutinise the carpet. ‘You’re a rational man,’ I went on. ‘You must concede that what has apparently happened to me is hard to explain. The way I talk, it’s not put on, you know that. Even Professor Taylor saw it and he’s genuinely English. Well genuinely over-English, frankly. You’ve seen me change, in a second - one sudden nanosecond, against a wall in Palmer Square - change from the guy you knew, all- American, philosophy-majoring, baseball-pitching, tooth- flossing regular old Mikey Young into someone completely different. I’m not different on the outside, but on the inside I am. You can’t deny that. It’s as plain as the hair on your head, which for some reason is all I can see of you at the moment. I know thousands of things I never knew before, but thousands of things I should know - I don’t. I don’t know who’s President of the United States, I don’t know where Hertford Connecticut is, I’m not even that sure where Connecticut itself is, come to that - somewhere on the right-hand-side, that’s all I’m sure of. I had never seen this campus before in my life until this morning, you know I wasn’t faking that. But I can tell you things about European History before 1920 that I couldn’t possibly know unless I’d studied it deeply. Here, I’ll prove it. Take this book and ask me any fact. Anything.’

258

Steve took the proffered book doubtfully. ‘So maybe you know stuff about Europe. So what?’ ‘You know me pretty well … you think you know me pretty well. Look around you at my bookshelves, not one single history book. Did I do any history in my first two years? Take any courses in it?’ ‘Guess not ‘Right. So test me. Anything from before 1930, say.’ Steve flipped through the book and stopped at a page. ‘Okay then, what was the Holy Alliance?’ I smiled. ‘Sir, please sir, easy-peasy, sir!’ I said, shooting my hand up in the air. ‘The Holy Alliance was the name given to a compact, sir, a compact signed by the extremely unholy trinity of… let me see, the Tsar of Russia - that would have been Alexander the First - and by Friedrich Wilhelm the Third of Prussia and by the Holy Roman Emperor, Francis the Second, though of course he was just plain old Francis the First of Austria now, wasn’t he? - what with Napoleon’s arse being whipped at Waterloo and all.’ ‘Who else signed it?’ Steve was studying the book carefully. ‘Well, sir, Naples, sir, Sardinia, sir, France and Spain, sir. It was subsequently signed and ratified by Britain - the Prince Regent, later George IV, his father being potty at the time of course, though Britain was part of the Quadruple Alliance which was quite different. And the Ottoman Sultan signed it too. Though I’m afraid to say I can’t remember his name, if I ever knew it, and of course the Pope blessed it with a great blessing. The compact was signed in 1815. For an extra ten points and the holiday in Barbados I would go for 26th September. Am I right?’ ‘Okay, okay …’ Steve rifled through the book again. ‘How about … Benjamin Disraeli?’ ‘Benjamin Disraeli? What can’t I tell you?’ I was just humming now, in my element, skating elegantly on thick ict. ‘Born 1804, 21st December I think. Coined the phrase

259

“the greasy pole” to describe his rise from humble Jewish origins to the Prime Ministership of high Victorian England and Empire. Son of a Sephardic dilettante, writer, antiquarian and sweetie by the name of Isaac who converted his whole family to Christianity in 1817. Ben started off as a law apprentice, dropped a bundle on bad investments and so turned himself into a novelist and wit to fund his dandy lifestyle and political aspirations. Wrote a series of books known as the Young England Novels, notably Coningsby, or the Younger Generation and Sybil, or the Two Nations. He’d been first elected to parliament a few years earlier, round about 18371 think, his fifth attempt at a seat. Anti-Whig, anti-utilitarian, he made a name for himself attacking his own government. He coined the phrase “organised hypocrisy” to describe Robert Peel’s attempts to repeal the Corn Laws. Hung around for years after that as leader of the party, Chancellor of the Exchequer under Lord Derby, framing the Second Reform Act of i860 which extended the vote to borough householders. Briefly became Prime Minister in 1868. Finally won an election against his great rival, William Ewart Gladstone in 1874, first Conservative win since 1841. Shoved through a load of trade-union and social reforms, borrowed four million quid to purchase the Suez Canal for Queen Victoria who was crazy about him, especially after he gave her the official new title “Empress of India”. He returned from the Congress of Berlin in 1878 claiming “Peace with Honour”, not unlike Chamberlain after Munich - though that won’t be in your book, I’m afraid - was created the First Earl of Beaconsfield in 1876, having turned down a dukedom earlier, died in 1881 after being booted out of office the previous year. 19th April was the day he died, eight years and a day before the birth of Adolf Hitler, of whom you’ve also never heard. His followers call themselves the Primrose League and to this day go on about One Nation Conservatism. His wife called him “Dizzy” and she was famous for her devotion, lack of tact and general

260

goofiness. Once travelled with him in a carriage to Parliament with her fingers jammed in the door in agony and never told him because she didn’t want to put him off his preparations for a big speech. Another time, she was in a garden with a couple of Victorian ladies and they tittered blushingly at a naked male statue’s generous endowment. “Oh that’s nothing,” she said, “you should see my Dizzy when he’s in the bath.” He described his final years as being his “anecdotage”. What else do you want to know?’ Steve didn’t look up from the book. ‘Give me the titles of some of his other novels.’ ‘Phew, don’t want much, do you? Well, his first was called something like Dorian Gray. Obviously not that, but something like it. Vivien Greyi Was that it? There was another called The Young Duke, his last was Endymion, I know that. Wrote it in 1880. And I’m pretty sure there was another one with a woman’s name in the title … Henrietta, I think. Henrietta Tempest, something like that?’ ‘Henrietta Temple, actually,’ said Steve closing the book. ‘Okay, so you know some history. What does that mean?’ ‘You tell me,’ I said. ‘Does it square with what you know of me? Let me tell you every American president this century.’ ‘Oh, like, big deal. Every schoolkid of ten can do that.’ ‘Listen,’ I said. ‘William McKinley (assassinated 1901), Teddy Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, Wood-row Wilson, Warren G Harding, Calvin Coolidge, Herbert C Hoover, FDR, FDR, FDR, Harry S Truman, Dwight D Eisenhower, Eisenhower again, John F Kennedy (assassinated ‘63), Lyndon B Johnson, Richard M Nixon, Nixon again (resigned ‘74), Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, Reagan again, George Bush and finally, ladies and gentlemen, the forty-second President of these United States, Bill Clinton of Little Rock, Arkansas. How’s that?’ There was a puzzled look on Steve’s face. ‘I kinda got lost somewhere in the middle.’ ‘Of course you did, after FDR, right?’

261

‘Right. There was a whole load of names there I never heard before. And you said Nixon resigned?’ ‘So you’ve heard of Nixon then?’ ‘Come on, Mikey. Get real.’ ‘Richard Milhouse Nixon, Tricky Dicky. Resigned in disgrace to avoid impeachment in 1973.’ ‘For your information Richard Nixon was President three times from i960 to 1972.’ ‘I see. But Kennedy, Carter, Bush, LBJ, Clinton … they mean nothing to you?’ ‘My little brother is called Clinton, but he sure as hell isn’t president.’ ‘There! You see?’ I lit another cigarette and started to pace up and down. ‘Everything you know is different from what I know. How can that be?’ ‘Your accent is different than it was yesterday. Some ways, you’re a different person than you were. I see that. But, Mikey, it’s your head. It’s all in your head.’ ‘Oh, and a crack to the skull gave me a scholar’s knowledge of European history did it? It gave me the details of American Presidents you’ve never heard of and about whom I could talk in front of a lie detector for two hours without causing the needle to tremble once. It filled my mind with movies and songs and stories you’ve never heard before? Play it again Sam. I’m gonna make him an offer he can’t refuse. She loves you, yeah, yeah, yeah. The force may be with you, young Skywalker, but you are not a Jedi yet. I love the smell of napalm in the morning. The Truth Is Out There. Hasta la vista, baby. Catch 22. There will be no white wash at the White House. The Tin Drum. What’s The Story, Morning Glory? Schindler’s List. The name’s Bond, James Bond. Ich bin ein Berliner. Catcher in the Rye. You may say that I’m a dreamer, but I’m not the only one. Perhaps some day you’ll join me, and the wo-o-o-rld will live as one. Beam me up, Scotty. I shall return. Sing if you’re glad to be gay, sing if you’re happy that way. Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy. Never, in the field of human conflict has so

262

much been owed by so many to so few. One small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind. From Here to Eternity. Never mind the bollocks, here’s the Sex Pistols. The Bridge on the River Kwai. Marlene Dietrich. ET phone home. What good is sitting, alone in a room, come hear, the music play, life is a cabaret, old friend, it’s only a cabaret. The Zapruda film and the grassy knoll. The Dirty Dozen. It’s coming home, it’s coming home, it’s coming, football’s coming home. Where Eagles Dare. I smoked it but I didn’t inhale. Where’s the beef? Read my lips, no new taxes. Scooby Dooby Doo, where are you? We’ve got some work for you now. There!’ I paused for breath, sweating from the combination of effort, exhilaration and hot pepperoni. On Steve’s face I saw an expression in which admiration, astonishment, amusement, bafflement and fear were racing for the lead. Astonishment was ahead by half a length, but the others were pressing hard. ‘Face up to it Steve, I’m giving you a problem here that you can’t solve by talking about bumps and amnesia. I come from somewhere else.’ I ruffled my hair to allow air to pass through and cool the sweat. ‘Don’t think I don’t know how mad I’m sounding. God knows, I’ve seen enough movies to know how hard it is for the alien time- travelling hero to persuade anyone to listen to him. They usually end up by turning him in.’ ‘Time travel?’ Steve closed his eyes tight in despair. ‘Oh Jesus, Mikey, you need help. You can’t be …’ ‘That’s not what I meant.’ ‘Let me call Doc Ballinger,’ he pleaded. ‘Mikey, I don’t know what’s happening, but … I care about you, I mean I care about what happens to you, I don’t want you to go nuts.’ 1 know what you mean, Steve, but please, just listen. That’s not what I’m saying. I haven’t travelled in time. That is, not exactly. It’s just that time has … time has travelled in me. No, that’s not right. Listen to me, will you? Just listen. I’ll tell you a story. Imagine it’s just an idea, okay, a

263

plot for a movie, something like that? Hear it with open ears … what’s the phrase? Without prejudice. Hear it without prejudice. Interrupt only if something is unclear. And when you’ve heard it, then you can decide what to do. Deal?’ ‘I guess so.’ I moved the books and carts to one side of the desk and hauled myself onto it, swinging my legs below me. Steve sat on the floor tailor-fashion, looking up at me like a toddler on the playmat at story time. ‘Okay,’ I said. ‘Imagine a guy. A youngish guy. English. About my age. He’s researching for a history doctorate in an English University town. Let’s call it Cambridge …’ Times passes. The sun sinks slowly in the west. Sounds penetrate the room. Basketballs slapping on the corridor floor. The squeal of skidding trainers. Blue-grass music playing in the room above. Doors slamming. Shouts. The flicking of towels on flesh. A badly tuned guitar across the hall. Distant bells chiming the hours that slip past unheeded. ‘… a pizza, some coke and some absolutely disgusting jam doughnuts and came back to this dorm building, this Henry Hall. There he decided to tell his new friend Steve everything that had happened, telling the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help him God. The End.’ I stood from the desk and stretched. Darkness had fallen outside and within Henry Hall silence reigned. Steve stayed down on the floor. His only movement was to lean forward from time to time and flick the end of the cigarette into the cola can, which was now so full of butts and sludge that it had long since ceased to fizz at each new fall of hot ash. ‘What I don’t understand,’ he said at last, ‘is how come, if this is all true, how come you can remember about it?’ ‘Exactly!’ I said. ‘That’s what beats me too,’ I said. ‘I mean if my body is out here, then why is my consciousness still part of the old world?’

264

‘I guess,’ said Steve slowly. ‘I guess if this guy Zuckermann was generating an artificial quantum singularity and you got caught in the event horizon then maybe … I don’t know …’ he shrugged helplessly. ‘Heck, Mikey, nothing you’ve said means anything to me.’ ‘But you do believe me? You do, don’t you?’ He spread his hands. ‘I can’t think of a better explanation for the way you’ve been behaving. But in theory this could happen all the time, you know? Maybe it’s happened many times before. We’d never know it. Maybe there’s a thousand twentieth centuries. A million. All with different outcomes. You generated one of your own and you’re stuck in it.’ ‘That’s it,’ I said. ‘But in my arrogance I thought I’d generated a better one. I thought if Hitler wasn’t born the century would have less to be ashamed of. I suppose I should have known better. The circumstances were still the same in Europe. There was still a vacuum in Germany waiting to be filled. There was still fifty years of anti- Semitism and nationalism ready to be exploited. There was still a Versailles Treaty and a Wall Street Crash and a Great Depression. But one thing at least ‘What?’ ‘Well, this Rudolf Gloder, this Fiihrer. I mean, at least he wasn’t as bad as Hitler. From what I could tell of him from that book he was human at least, sane. I mean there weren’t any death camps, no Zyklon B, no holocaust, no frothing monomania, no genocide.’ Steve stood slowly, easing the cramp in his legs. ‘Oh Mikey,’ he said sorrowfully. ‘Oh Mikey, you don’t know what you’re saying.’ I stared at him. ‘What do you mean?’ ‘This Hitler of yours, what happened to him?’ ‘He committed suicide as the Russians were pressing in on Berlin on one side and the Americans and British on the other. Shot himself and was burned in petrol in the garden of the Reich Chancellery. 30th April, 1945.’

265

‘I think maybe,’ said Steve going over to the computer, ‘that it’s time you had a look at some of these carts.’ He picked one up from the pile we had collected at the library, a small square box about three inches by four, and half an inch thick. He pulled at the casing and removed a smaller square of black plastic. ‘Why can’t you tell me what it is you want me to know?’ ‘Unlike you,’ said Steve, pushing the black square into a slit below the computer’s monitor, I’m no history scholar.’ ‘So this is what, some sort of video then? Or is it like a CD ROM?’ ‘It’s not like anything,’ said Steve. ‘It’s a cart. It’s just a cart.’ I looked around the desk with a helpless air. ‘And where’s the keyboard?’ Steve shook his head. ‘Heck Mikey, what do you think this is, a frigging piano?’ He flicked a switch on the monitor and the screen lit up in orange and black. ‘You wanna watch from the beginning?’ He tossed me the cart’s casing. I looked at its title, printed in thick black German gothic above a huge flaming swastika. The fall of Europe ‘Oh shit,’ I said, filled with bowel-dropping dread. ‘Yes. From the beginning.’ Steve put his finger on the surface of the TV and a menu flashed up, blue lettering in big block squares. He touched the first square. A faint spinning noise came from the interior of the computer and almost immediately an orchestral fanfare blasted from speakers in the corners of the room. Steve dived towards a fader switch and the volume dropped. Not before the wall was thumped and a bleary shout had toM us to keep the frigging noise down. Steve handed me some earphones and guided my hands to the volume fader. ‘Donaldson and Webb Wo-o-rld History Series!’ a voice proclaimed, as if announcing a heavyweight title bout.

266

‘The Fall of Europe.’ The menu faded to a title screen, in the same gothic lettering. I dropped down into the chair in front of the monitor. The film, and it was a kind of film - marginally interactive, allowing me to pause and access little side-boxes of information using my finger on the screen - seemed to me to be aimed more at schools than at an Ivy League major, but it was just what I needed. Just what I didn’t need. ‘Here,’ said Steve, ‘this goes with it.’ The clear plastic casing of the cart-holder contained a shiny printed cover, like the cover of a CD album. Steve pulled it out and gave it to me and from time to time I referred to this leaflet as I watched. Donaldson and Webb Educational Media Cartridges Series 3. World History. Part V: The Fall Of Europe Search index Track 1 May 1932 The Nazi Party elected to the Reichstag. Versailles Treaty renegotiated with Britain, France and America. Pact with Stalin. Track 2 1933-34 Track 3 1935-36 Track 4 1937 Track 5 1938 PtI Launch of Deutschwagen Rotary Engined Automobile. Development of miniature evacuated tube components transforms burgeoning German electronics industry. Edinburgh Agreement ensures mutual trade arrangements between British Empire and The New Reich. Licensing of German technological developments in return for British rubber concessions and use of eastern trade routes. Berlin Olympics attended by President Roosevelt and King George V.

267

German-wide social welfare and national insurance scheme launched. Austria and Germany united. Gloder awarded Nobel Peace Prize. Addresses League of Nations on ‘The Modern State’. Fourth Nazi Congress: shock announcement by Gloder of development at Gottingen Institute of weaponry harnessing power of the atom. Paris Conference boycotted by Germany. Detonation of atomic bombs devastates Moscow and Leningrad, killing Stalin and entire

Politburo. German invasion of Soviet Union. Annexation of Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Hungary, Greece, Turkey and the Baltic States. Track 6 1938 Pt.2 Capitulation of Scandinavia, Benelux, France and the United Kingdom. First Greater German Reich Conference in Berlin attended by King Edward VIII of Great Britain, Marshal Petain, Benito Mussolini, Generalissimo Franco and other heads of state. Terms of cooperation agreed with United States of America. Mutual agreement brokered by Germany to divide Pacific control between America and Imperial Japan. British possessions in India, Australia and Africa effectively under German control. Canada allowed to remain neutral. Track 7 1939 All Jews forced to evacuate countries under the control of Greater German Reich and emigrate to new ‘Jewish Free State’ in area carved out between Montenegro and Herzegovina under control of Reichsminister Heydrich. American protests ignored. Rebellion in Britain quashed, over five thousand executed, including leading politicians and the Duke of York, brother of British King. Track 1940-4

Track 1942 Track

268

1943 Track I .United States announces separate development of atom bomb. State of Cold War between Greater Germany and America. All diplomatic contacts closed. 9 Rumours of ill-treatment and mass-murder of citizens of Balkan Jewish Free State bring America to the brink of nuclear war with Greater Germany. Announcements of innovations in Germany rocketry and electronic telemetry cause United States government to back down. Rebellion in Russia ruthlessly crushed. 10 Unified system of education imposed across New Europe. German to become first language of all Europeans. Discovery by Berlin government of secret American supplies to resistance movement in Portugal brings new threat of war between the United States and Germany. 11 Credits. Copyright notice. Course notes. Suggested reading. I watched the whole cart, Steve told me afterwards, with my mouth open. It seems my attitude never shifted, my hands never moved, my legs never crossed or uncrossed, massaging my my shoulder never dropped. It was as if, he said, I was in a state of near catalepsy. Only the movement of my eyes between the screen and the printed search index in my hands betrayed any sign of life or consciousness. When it had finished, Steve leaned forward, flicked a switch on the computer and put a hand on my shoulder. I stared into the screen’s grey emptiness as the cart slid from its drive. ‘Oh Christ,’ I said, in a kind of whimper. ‘What have I done? What have I done?’ ‘Hey, don’t worry,’ said Steve, shoulders. ‘It’s history. It’s all history.’ ‘Steve, what happened to the Jews? This Jewish Free State, does it still exist?’

269

‘Look that was years ago, things have changed now. America and Europe are on pretty good terms. Europe even has free elections. More or less free.’ ‘You haven’t answered my question. The Jews, what about them?’ ‘There aren’t any. Not in Europe.’ ‘You mean they were moved? To Israel? What happened?’ A sudden loud knock on the door caused Steve to whip his hand from my shoulder and leap back to the centre of the room. In answer to my raised eyebrows he shook his head, as puzzled as me as to who the hell might be calling on me at one o’clock in the morning. The knock came again, louder this time. ‘Come in!’ I said. Two men entered the room. They both wore the same checked short-sleeved shirts I had seen earlier in the day when Steve and I had sat at a table next to them in the outside courtyard of the Alchemist and Barrister while they bickered over maps. Natural History Still waters run deep ‘Find me a map of the area,’ said Kremer. ‘A geological map. The latest.’ Bauer scribbled on a request form, which he packed into a small, brass torpedo. Going over to the wall he asked Kremer how late he imagined they would be working that evening. Kremer, hunched over the microscope, said nothing. Bauer slipped the torpedo into the communication tube. He smacked the cap closed and listened as the torpedo was sucked away and clattered down the pipework on its journey to the first-floor typing pool. He looked at his watch: thirty-four minutes past five. Hartmann, Head of Documents maintained that any document in the university could be retrieved and delivered within fifteen minutes. He had promised to buy Bauer a whole litre of Berliner white beer if he failed to live up to this proud boast by so much as a second. This should be a good

270

test and on such a sultry August day, a large beer, maybe with a shot of raspberry, would be welcome. ‘Ruth, a moment,’ he said, beckoning his assistant. ‘Would you perhaps be so kind as to telephone my wife and tell her that I will be late home again this evening?’ Ruth nodded and moved stiffly to the telephone. She did not take kindly to being treated as a secretary. Bauer returned to his part of the bench and began to sort idly and hopelessly through his papers. Kremer looked up from the microscope, snapping his fingers. ‘Well? Where is it?’ he said. ‘The map? Good God, Johann, give them a chance. You only asked me a minute ago.’ ‘What? Really? Yes, I’m sorry.’ Kremer smiled across at him like a rueful schoolboy. ‘Still, I do wish they would hurry up.’ ‘Have you seen something?’ Kremer pinched the bridge of his nose wearily, his eyes closed. ‘No. Nothing.’ ‘You were examining the zinc and sodium levels?’ ‘Yes, but it’s nothing. Higher than average, but lower than our own supply here. We should be looking for something bigger, something much bigger.’ ‘What about those traces of methyl orange?’ ‘It’s contamination, it must be. That original doctor, I assume. What was his name?’ ‘Schenck. Horst Schenck.’ ‘Yes, him. The whole thing is insane, Dietrich. If I hadn’t seen it work on our mice I would believe it was all a hoax.’ Kremer turned back to his microscope with a sigh. ‘Doctor Bauer?’ Ruth held out the telephone towards him as if it were contaminated with anthrax. ‘Your wife asks that you come and say goodnight to your son.’ Bauer took the telephone and listened for a while in affectionate amusement to the quick breathing of his child. ‘Axi?’ he said at last.

271

‘Papa?’ ‘Have you been a good boy today?’ ‘Papa!’ ‘I shall see you tomorrow.’ ‘Milk.’ ‘Did you say “milk”? You want some milk?’ ‘Milk; ‘Mutti will give you milk. I can’t give you milk over the telephone, you know. Ask Mutti for some milk.’ There followed more quick breathing and then a longer silence. ‘Axel? Are you there?’ ‘Fox.’ ‘Fox?’ ‘Fox. Fox, fox, fox.’ ‘Well, that’s nice.’ Bauer heard a clatter as the telephone was dropped. After another silence Marthe’s voice echoed in his ear. ‘Hello, darling. We saw a fox today. In the garden. It’s his favourite animal now.’ ‘Ah. That explains it.’ ‘I think he’s got ear-ache again. He says “naughty ear” and bangs the side of his head with the palm of his hand.’ ‘I’m sure it’s nothing serious. I’ll take a look tomorrow morning.’ ‘How late are you going to be? That Jew student of yours wouldn’t tell me.’ ‘I’m sorry, darling. But what I’m working on. It’s very important. Top priority.’ ‘I understand. I do. But you will try and eat tonight, ‘:you? ‘Of course. We’re very well looked after here, you know.’ ‘I know. The Fiihrer’s favourites.’ ‘Goodbye, darling.’ Bauer replaced the receiver. Ruth was standing awkwardly in the middle of the room, looking busily at a clipboard to show that she hadn’t been listening.

272

‘I think you might as well go home, Fraulem Goldmann. Professor Kremer and I can manage without you for the rest of the day.’ ‘I am very happy to stay, sir.’ ‘No, no. Please. No need.’ On her way out, Ruth almost collided with a breathless messenger from retrievals. A glance at his watch told Bauer that he would have to buy his own beer again this evening. ‘Nothing,’ said Kremer disgustedly. ‘Absolutely nothing. The most topographically boring, geologically undistinguished and minerally commonplace terrain in the whole wide world.’ ‘Not even especially pretty,’ agreed Bauer. ‘For Austria, that is.’ ‘Then what is going on? What in deepest hell is going on?’ Kremer hammered his pipe-stem onto the map. ‘It simply makes no sense. No sense at all.’ ‘Maybe …” said Bauer hesitantly. ‘Maybe we have missed something obvious. You always taught me that every centimetre one moves from an erroneous first principle takes one a kilometre further from the truth. Maybe we are going in entirely the wrong direction.’ Kremer looked up from the map. ‘Explain.’ ‘We are searching desperately for the cause of an effect that we do not understand. Perhaps it is the effect itself we should be examining.’ Kremer looked at him steadily. ‘Perhaps,’ he said slowly, drawing out the word with reluctance. ‘But, Dietrich, we are down to thirty centilitres. The stakes are so high, the pressure from Berlin so intense. We cannot afford the luxury of a blind alley.’ ‘That is the point I’m making, Johann. A blind alley is where we are. Let us go back. Let us go back to the beginning.’ Bauer stretched out a hand to the shelf above the bench and pulled out the file marked ‘Brunau’. American History

273

The Gettysburg Address ‘So, tell me, Mike. What do you know about Brunau?’ The voice was warm, interested and impressed, as if the speaker were asking me to do a trick to impress a friend. I wondered what had happened to Steve. The speed and assurance of the two men - they had given their names as Hubbard and Brown - had left no time for questions or complaints. Would we follow them to their car please? It was right outside. There were some questions that I could help them with. It would be so useful. No need to bring anything and of course no need to worry. I had been placed between Hubbard and Brown in the back seat of the first of two long, black sedans parked outside the doorway of Henry Hall and it was only as we moved off that it had occurred to me that Steve was nowhere to be seen. I shifted round to give myself a view through the rear-window to see if he was in the second car, but Brown, like an Edwardian schoolmaster, twisted my head gently but firmly back round to face the front. We had travelled no more than twenty minutes before we turned off the road and into the driveway of a large house. As we got out of the car I could make out the clapboard of the gables, clinker-built like the background of that painting, American Cothic. The air was soft and fragrant with the smell of pine trees. Inside, I was led through to a dining room and shown a seat in the middle of a large, shining maplewood table. Hubbard sat opposite me and Brown stood at one end, fiddling with a coffee-pot whose lid appeared to be stuck. ‘Consarned thing,’ he said, exasperatedly thumping the side of the lid with the side of his fist. ‘Charles Winninger!’ I exclaimed excitedly, then instantly wished that I had held my tongue. Hubbard leaned forward with interest. ‘Excuse me?’ ‘It’s nothing,’ I said. ‘I was just thinking aloud.’ ‘No, no. Please …” Hubbard spread his hands invitingly. ‘I was just thinking of Destry Rides Again. Charles Winninger plays a character called Wash Dimsdale and

274

he’s always saying “consarned” this and “consarned” that. I never heard anyone else use the word before. That’s all.’ Hubbard looked up at Brown, who shrugged and shook his head. ‘It’s a movie,’ I explained. ‘At least it was once. But you’ve probably never heard of it.’ I saw that Hubbard had written down in a notebook the words ‘Destry’ and ‘Wininger’ followed by two large question-marks. I suppressed a desire to correct the spelling and stared down at the table which glowed as if new. There was a quality to it however, which suggested to me that it was not new, just very, very underused. ‘But you didn’t answer my original question, did you Mike? Brunau. Tell me what you know about Brunau.’ ‘What makes you think I know anything at all about it?’ ‘You don’t?’ ‘Never heard of the place,’ I said. ‘Well now, that’s a start, Mikey. You know it’s a place. You know it isn’t a person or a shade of pink. That’s a good start.’ Pants! Fell into that one, didn’t I? ‘I suppose I must have heard of it somewhere. In a geography lesson at school maybe …’ I tried, fum-blingly, to correct the sentence into something more American. ‘I mean, I guess I heard it in geography class, you know? In school some time. I.guess so, anyways.’ I winced inwardly at that last word. Overdoing it a tad. Hubbard didn’t seem to notice anything wrong, just continued with his gentle probing. ‘That right? So you remember where it is, this Brunau?’ ‘Germany?’ ‘Good. You’re doing good, Mike.’ ‘Hey! You want your coffee black or with cream?’ ¦ ‘Cream please,’ I said, looking up from the table for the first time. Brown had unstuck the lid of the coffeepot somehow and was now delicately pouring thick black coffee into tiny little cups.

275

There was an awkward pause as the social embarrassment of the handing round of sugar and teaspoons was completed. ‘Where’s Steve?’ I asked, looking around the room. ‘Is he here?’ ‘He’s around,’ said Hubbard, taking an exploratory sip of coffee. ‘Can I see him?’ ‘Great coffee, Don.’ Brown nodded contentedly, as if he was used to receiving compliments on the quality of his brew. ‘I’d rather not talk any more until I’ve seen him. Found out what this is all about.’ ‘This is about you, me and Mr Brown here having a little pow-wow, Mike. That’s all. Nothing to worry about. You were telling us that you thought maybe Brunau was in Germany?’ ‘Well it sounds like a German name, doesn’t it?’ ‘Let’s try you on the name Hitler, shall we? That mean anything to you? Hitler?’ Maybe my pupils dilated, maybe they shrank. Maybe I caught my breath a fraction. Maybe my colour changed. I know that I tried to sound casual and I know that the attempt failed. ‘Hitler?’ I said, swallowing. ‘Where’s that?’ Hubbard looked up again at Brown who nodded and took a small chromium box from his breast pocket. Placing the box carefully on the table between me and Hubbard, Brown returned to his standing position at the end of the table, placing his hands behind his back like an acolyte who has just performed a ceremonial ritual of great importance. I stared at the box as* if expecting it to speak. Which was smart of me as a matter of fact, because, after Hubbard had pressed a switch on its side, that was exactly what it did do. There was background noise, the rustling of cellophane, the clink of glasses, the splutter of a match, the distant

276

rush of traffic and other extraneous alfresco sounds, but essentially the box spoke. This is what it said, in two voices. Mine and Steve’s. Me: You’ll think I’m mad, I know. But I’m supremely happy at the moment. Steve: Yeah? How come? Me: You wouldn’t understand if I told you. Steve: Try me. Me: I’m happy because when I asked you earlier, you told me that you’d never heard of Adolf Hitler. Steve: That made you happy? Me: You can have no idea what that means. You’ve never heard the names Hitler or Schickelgruber or Polzl. You’ve never heard of Brunau, you’ve never… Steve: Brunau? Me: Brunau-am~Inn, Upper Austria. It’s not even a name to you and that makes me the happiest man alive. Steve: Well that’s jake for you. Me: You’ve never heard of Auschwitz or Dachau. You’ve never heard of the Nazi Party. You’ve never heard of … Hubbard flicked the switch once more. ‘So now we’re getting somewhere. Brunau is not in Germany, it’s in a region of Germany. It’s in Austria, Upper Austria even. That kinda narrows it down a little, don’t you think?’ ‘If you knew all the time that I knew where Brunau was,’ I said, ‘why did you string me along?’ ‘Well now, I guess I could put that question another way, Mikey. If you knew where Brunau was all the time, why did you string us along?’ ‘Then that’s stalemate, isn’t it?’ I said. Hubbard looked into my eyes. I looked back into his and in the restful chocolate brown of them I tried to see what motive and what intent might be lying there. ‘And Hitler,’ he said. ‘You know that Hitler isn’t a place. You know that it’s a man’s name. “Adolf Hitler”, you said. Who might Adolf Hitler be?’ I shook my head. ‘And how about Auschwitz? What’s that? A place, a person, a brand of beer?’ .

277

I shrugged. ‘You tell me.’ The look of sadness in Hubbard’s eyes intensified. ‘That’s not a good answer, Mikey,’ he said. ‘That’s a terrible answer. We want you to help us. We want you to tell us what you know. That’s what this is about. It’s not about you trying to be smart.’ ‘And what we want to know,’ Brown’s harsher voice added from the end of the table, ‘is just who in tarnation you really are.’ My heart had started to hammer heavily in my chest. ‘But you know who I am. I’m Michael Young. You know that.’ ‘Do we know that, Mikey?’ Hubbard’s voice was speculative, like that of an academic reflecting on the meaning of meaning. ‘Do we really? We know that you look like Michael Young, but we know that you sure as shooting don’t sound like him. We know that you sure as shooting don’t behave like him. So can we know, you know? Really know)’ ‘Why don’t you take my fingerprints? That should satisfy you.’ ‘We did that already,’ said Hubbard. ‘And?’ ‘You must know the answer to that,’ Hubbard said gently, ‘or you wouldn’t have raised the issue in the first place, now would you?’ ‘So, what then? You think I’ve had a skin graft? You think I’m some sort of clone? What?’ Hubbard gave no answer, but opened a small notebook and went carefully through the pages. ‘How d’you make out with Professor Taylor?’ he asked. ‘Make out with him? I don’t know what you mean. Like you, he asked me a lot of questions. He told me not to worry. He told me I should have some tests.’ ‘Why do you think Professor Taylor is over here?’ ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘An Englishman in America, that’s a strange thing. What do you figure he’s doing here?’ I thought about this for a while.

278

‘He’s a defector?’ I suggested. ‘A European dissident, something like that?’ ‘A defector.’ Hubbard tried the word out. ‘And how about you? You a European defector too?’ ‘I’m not European.’ ‘You talk like a European, Mikey. Your parents are European.’ I lowered my head in exasperation. ‘What are you suggesting? That I’m a spy?’ ‘You tell us.’ I looked at them both in astonishment. ‘Are you serious? I mean, what kind of spy would go to all the trouble of disguising himself perfectly as an all-Ameri-can student, right down to the fingerprints and then go around the place talking loudly in an English accent?’ ‘Maybe the kind of spy who doesn’t know he’s a spy,’ said Brown. ‘What’s that supposed to mean?’ ‘It doesn’t mean anything,’ said Hubbard, frowning slightly at Brown. ‘Look,’ I said. ‘If you’ve spoken to Steve and you’ve spoken to Professor Taylor and to Doctor Ballinger and to anyone else, you’ll know that I banged my head on a wall last night and that I haven’t been the same since. That’s all there is to it. Bit of memory loss, speech gone funny. It’s weird but that’s all it is. Weird.’ ‘Then how come, Mikey,’ said Hubbard. ‘How come these names Hitler and Auschwitz and Polzl and BrunauamTnn?’ ‘I must have heard them somewhere. In my subconscious. And for some reason the bang on the head brought them to the surface of my mind. I mean, what’s so bloody important about them? They don’t mean anything do they? They aren’t of any significance. No one else seems to have heard of them.’ ‘That’s right, Mikey. Outside of this room, I shouldn’t think there’s more than twelve people in the whole United States of America who ever heard those names in all their

279

lives. I had never heard them myself until you mentioned them to Steve in the courtyard of that cosy little bar off Witherspoon Street this afternoon. But you know, when we played the recording back to some friends of ours in Washington they damn near pooped their pants. Can you believe that? Damn near pooped their hundred-dollar pants.’ ‘But why?’ I ran my fingers through my hair in bewilderment. ‘I don’t understand why the names should mean anything at all.’ Hubbard pricked his ears up at the sound of a car in the driveway. ‘Excuse me, Mike. I’ll be right back,’ he said, rising. He left the room with a nod to Brown, closing the door behind him, and a few moments later I heard the front door open and the low murmur of voices in the hallway. Alone with Brown, who seemed disinclined to talk, I tried to work out what was going on. Professor Taylor. It must have something to do with him. If Europe and the United States were in a state of Cold War as from everything I had learned that night they appeared to be, then Taylor might well be some kind of pro-American dissident. A sort of Solzhenitsyn or Gordievsky equivalent who had at some time managed to defect to the United States. Maybe from time to time he fed tid-bits to the CIA or whichever organisation it was that Hubbard and Brown worked for. Maybe Taylor had heard about this strange undergraduate student who had suddenly started talking like an Englishman and maybe he felt suspicious enough, after interviewing him personally, to recommend to his masters in Washington that this Michael Young be monitored and followed up. Yet how was it possible that they should be interested in the name Hitler? I placed my hands on my head and pushed downwards as if to force my brain to work. It made no sense at all. ‘Headache?’ said Brown sympathetically.

280

‘Sort of,’ I said looking up. ‘The kind that comes with complete confusion.’ ‘All you gotta do is say everything you know. Leave it to us to be confused … heck, that’s our job.’ ‘That’s funny,’ I said, surprised by the friendliness in his voice. ‘I had sort of formed the opinion that you were Mr Nasty.’ ‘Excuse me?’ ‘You know, the old interviewing technique. Nice Cop, Nasty Cop. I got it into my head that you were the nasty one.’ Brown smiled bashfully. ‘Well heckamighty, son,’ he said in his cartoon Western accent, ‘I kinda hoped we were both nice.’ The door to the dining room opened and Hubbard appeared. ‘Some people to see you,’ he said, stepping back from the doorway. A middle-aged woman stood there for a moment, blinking in the light and then rushed forward, arms outstretched. ‘Mikey! Oh Mikey, darling!’ I stared open-mouthed. ‘Mother?’ She ran towards me, bracelets clacking. ‘Honey, we’ve been worried sick ever since we heard. Why didn’t you call?’ My arms full of her, her soft powdered cheeks against mine, I let her complete the long embrace. Her hair was dyed a bright gold, and the scent of her was alien in its richness and deep fruited perfume, but it was my mother all right. No question about that. I looked up over her shoulder and saw a man limp slowly into the room. ‘Christ,’ I whispered. ‘Father, is that you?’ The last time I had seen my father I had been ten years old. He had not been bald or frail or stooping. He had been strong and upright and handsome and everything a dead father remains for all time in the memory of a child. He looked at me briefly. ‘Hello, son,’ he said, and then turned to Hubbard with a nod.

281

‘You’re sure, sir?’ said Hubbard. ‘Absolutely sure?’ ‘You think I don’t know my own boy?’ ‘Of course it’s Mike,’ said my mother, stroking my hair. ‘What happened, honey? They said you were in an accident. Why didn’t you call?’ Their accents sounded to me wholly American. I didn’t want to speak and frighten them with my own British voice. I searched for words that would sound neutral in accent. Words without too many r’s or a’s in them. ‘My head,’ I said, in a low whisper. ‘Bump.’ ‘Oh my poor baby! Did you see a doctor?’ I nodded bravely. ‘Mr Hubbard,’ my father was saying. ‘Maybe you would now be kind enough to explain to me why you thought this might not be my son and why we were conveyed in the middle of the night, by government car, to a house like this, a house which has all the appearance to me of a …” ‘Why don’t we all sit down around the table and discuss this?’ said Hubbard, and I thought I detected a hint of deference in his voice. My mother was gazing tenderly into my eyes and still stroking my head, perhaps feeling for the bump. ‘Hi, Mom,’ I said, in the best American I could manage. Mom seemed more likely than Mother, Mum or Mummy. She smiled and shushed, leading me to the table like an ancient invalid. Brown meanwhile had returned from the adjoining kitchen with a larger coffee-pot and a big round plate of biscuits. My father was wearing a severe frown and looked about him with mistrust. ‘I assume, gentlemen,’ he said, ‘that there are listening devices planted in this room? I may well be retired from the services now, but you will know from my record that I have connections in Washington. In your department in Washington, Mr Hubbard. I am happy to place on your covert tape my extreme displeasure at the outrageous way you are treating me and my family. What you think my son could have to offer you is a matter entirely beyond my comprehension.’

282

‘We would like to come to that, Colonel Young,’ said Hubbard, licking his lips nervously. Colonel Young … I looked at my father again. I thought I had discerned a suggestion of Britishness in his voice, but no more than that hint of English that lingered till the end in the voices of Cary Grant and Ray Milland, the sort of fruity drawl that also existed in the tones of grand, natural born New Englanders. He looked ill and old and I didn’t think I would have known him from the photographs I had grown up with in my mother’s house in Hampshire or from the eight millimetre footage that she ran at Christmasses or when she felt low and unloved. ‘First off,’ Hubbard continued. ‘I would like to ask you, sir, and you, ma’am, if the words “Brunau” or “Polzl” or “Hitler” or “Auschwitz” have any meaning for you?’ My father cocked an eye briefly at the ceiling. ‘None whatever,’ he .s,aid with decision. ‘Mary?’ My mother shook her head apologetically. Hubbard tried again. ‘I would like you to think very hard, Colonel. When you were still in England, perhaps? Maybe you heard the names there? Or saw them written down? This is how they are spelled.’ He opened his notebook and passed it over to my father who looked at the words carefully. ‘The ending “au” is common enough in Southern German and Austrian place names,’ he said, with a thoughtful, Holmesian dip of the head, ‘Thalgau, Thurgau, Passau and so on. I am not familiar with Brunau, however. Hitler means absolutely nothing. Nor does “Polzl” I fear. “Auschwitz” could be north-eastern German, Polish even. Mary?’ He pushed the notebook past me and towards my mother. I noticed that my father had pronounced the German words flawlessly. My mother stared at the words as if willing them to mean something for my sake. ‘I’m sorry,’ she said. ‘I never saw these words before in my life.’ Hubbard took back the notebook and sighed.

283

‘You are aware, no doubt,’ said my father, ‘that when I sought asylum here in 1958 I was thoroughly investigated. My debriefing took more than a year and a half. Since that time my work for the American government has earned me the highest commendations. I hope you are not now questioning my loyalty?’ ‘No, sir,’ said Hubbard, a pleading note in his voice. ‘Not at all. I assure you, not at all. Please believe that.’ ‘Well then, perhaps you would now be finally kind enough to tell me what this all about?’ ‘Mikey,’ said Hubbard. ‘Feel like doing me a favor?’ ‘What sort of favour?’ ‘A very simple one. How about you recite to me the Gettysburg Address?’ I swallowed. ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘Are you mad?’ my father spluttered. ‘The Gettysburg Address, Mikey,’ said Hubbard, ignoring him. ‘How does it go?’ ‘Er …’ I racked my brains for a way out. The Gettysburg Address? Something about ‘Four score and ten’ came into my mind, and I knew it contained that famous spiel about ‘government of the people, for the people and by the people,’ but that was all I did know. How the various parts connected up was a mystery to me. I had a dread feeling that the Gettysburg Address was one of those things that every American was supposed to know. Like the words of the Star-Spangled Banner and the meaning of ‘grade point average’. ‘Go on, honey,’ my mother said, encouragingly, ‘like you used to. Michael has a lovely voice,’ she added to the room. ‘My memory is not so good …’ I said, huskily. ‘You know, since ‘That’s okay, Mike,’ said Hubbard. ‘Matter of fact, you can read it if you like. It’s up there on the wall behind me. See?’ Sure enough, above his head, framed in pale wood, was a long passage of text, mounted on deckled cardboard the

284

opening word ‘FOURSCORE’ in fancy block capitals. I knew that Hubbard was not interested in whether or not I had remembered the speech, but what my accent would sound like when I read it and what effect that would have on my parents. To hell with it, I thought, and began to read. I declaimed without pretence, without any effort at American vowels or cadences. Even to my own ears, after a day of hearing nothing but American voices all around me, I sounded more like Hugh Grant than anything human, but what the hell … ‘Fourscore and seven years ago,’ I read, ‘our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. We are met on a great battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this. But, in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate, we cannot consecrate, we cannot hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it, far above our poor power to add-’

‘Fine,’ said Hubbard, ‘that’ll do fine, Mike. Thank you.’ He turned to look at my mother, who was goggling at me as at a ghost. ‘Mike … darling!’ she said, a hand to her mouth. ‘Read it properly! Like you used to. On Fourth of July parades. Do it properly, honey.’ ‘I’m sorry, mother,’ I said. ‘That’s how I sound. This is my voice. This is me.’ My father was staring at me too. ‘Michael,’ he said, ‘if this is your idea of a joke, then let me tell you ‘No joke, sir,’ I said. ‘It’s no joke.’ Hubbard, more relaxed now, switched on the recording box, and once more the conversation between me and





Unknown




285

Steve at the Alchemist and Barrister was broadcast to the room. My father frowned as the machine played. My mother shot anxious, uncomprehending glances between us. ‘Hitler, Polzl, Brunau …’ Hubbard switched off the recorder and repeated the words slowly. ‘You’ve told us, Colonel and Mrs Young, that these names mean nothing to you. Judging by the conversation we have just heard they mean a lot to your son, wouldn’t you say?’ My father pointed at the recorder. ‘Whose was the other voice we heard?’ ‘That was the voice of an undergraduate named Steven Burns, a junior year history of science major. We have nothing against him other than that he is a suspected homosexual.’ ‘A homosexual!’ My mother’s eyes rounded in horror. ‘Is this what this is all about, because let me assure you, Mr Hubert-’ ‘That’s Hubbard, ma’am.’ ‘Whatever your name is, let me assure you that my son is no homosexual! Absolutely not.’ ‘Of course not, Mrs Young. Believe me that is not what we wished to imply. It was what your son said that interests us. Hitler, Polzl, Brunau …’ ‘You keep mentioning these names,’ snapped my father. ‘What’s so darned important about them? Isn’t it clear that my son is sick? He needs medical attention, not this … this inquisition, this childish cloak-and-dagger nonsense.’ ‘You are still quite sure that he is your son?’ ‘Of course we’re sure! How many times do I have to tell you?’ ‘In spite of his accent?’ ‘Don’t be ridiculous. We’ve told you. I would know Michael if he shaved his head, grew a beard and spoke in nothing but Swahili.’ Hubbard put up his hands. ‘Well now, you see, that’s what makes this whole affair so curious.’

286

‘Affair? Affair? What is this, the Lisbon Incident? A boy bangs his head, loses his memory and speaks in a strange accent. This is a matter for medical science not paranoid midnight interrogations. Now,’ my father started to rise, ‘if there is nothing further, we would like to take Michael home.’ Brown, who had been pacing up and down behind Hubbard, leaned forward and whispered in his ear. Hubbard listened, whispered back a quick question and then nodded his head. Something in their body language made me aware, with some surprise, that it was Brown who was the senior of the two. ‘Colonel Young, sir,’ said Hubbard. ‘I’m afraid that isn’t going to be possible just yet. I need you to sit down to listen to me.’ ‘I believe I have listened quite enough …’ It won’t take long sir. Perhaps Mrs Young wouldn’t mind waiting in the next room for a short while?’ ‘I am staying right here!’ said my mother, pink with indignation. ‘What I am about to reveal is classified, ma’am. I’m afraid I cannot allow you to stay.’ ‘Well, what about Mike?’ ‘We have reason to believe that your son is already in possession of this information. That is the reason we are gathered here this evening.’ ‘This morning, you mean!’ said my mother tartly, rising with reluctance and moving towards the door. She cast a look back over her shoulder. My father nodded to her in reassurance and she left the room with a sniff. As the door closed behind her I heard a female voice gently asking her if she was hungry. ‘I do apologise for that, Colonel Young, sir. When you have heard what we are going to say I believe you will understand the need for this caution.’ ‘Yes, yes,’ my father nodded.

287

‘Although you have retired from your previous position, sir, you are aware of what I mean when I say “grade one security”? The phrase is familiar to you?’ ‘Son,’ said my father, pushing out his chest and tapping it a half a dozen times, ‘I’ve got secrets locked up inside here that would make the guts fly out of your throat.’ ‘I’m quite sure that’s true, sir,’ Hubbard turned to me, a far-away look in his eyes, as if repeating a mantra learned at school. ‘And you, Michael. You understand that whatever I tell you here must never be repeated outside this room?’ I nodded, nervously wiping my hands on the cotton of my chino shorts. ‘You are prepared to take an oath to that effect?’ ‘Certainly,’ I said. Hubbard reached an arm down to the floor, like a man in a restaurant who has dropped a napkin, and came up with a small black bible. He passed it over to me tenderly. I looked across at my father, wanting someone with whom I could share the comic absurdity of this, but he was looking profoundly serious. ‘Take the book in your right hand, please, Michael.’ I did so. The cover, black bobbled leather, was stamped in gold with the Seal of the President of the United States. I lifted the cover half an inch and saw with surprise that this wasn’t a bible at all. ‘Repeat after me. I Michael Young …’ ‘I Michael Young …’ ‘Do solemnly swear …’ ‘Do solemnly swear ‘On the Constitution of the United States of America ‘On the Constitution of the United States of America …’ ‘That I will hold fast within ‘That I will hold fast within ‘All information tendered to me …’ ‘All information tendered to me ‘Pertaining to the security of my country ‘Pertaining to the security of my country …’

288

‘Nor ever reveal by word, deed or any means whatsoever …’ ‘Nor ever reveal by word, deed or any means whatsoever …’ ‘That which is divulged to me …’ ‘That which is divulged to me …’ ‘By officers of the United States Government ‘By officers of the United States Government ‘So help me God.’ ‘So help me God.’ ‘Fine,’ said Hubbard, taking back the book. ‘You understand the oath you have taken here?’ ‘I think so.’ ‘If ever we have cause to believe that you have repeated to anyone outside this room what you are about to hear, you may be charged with a felony. The name of that felony is treason and the maximum penalty for treason is death.’ ‘That’s pretty clear then,’ I said. ‘Alrighty then.’ Hubbard looked across at Brown. ‘Don, maybe you’d like to take it from here?’ Brown, still standing, nodded his head and started to pour out coffee, perching a biscuit on each saucer as he did so, one of those big chocolate chip cookies, the kind freckled, crew-cut American kids have with their glasses of milk in fifties movies. ‘The story I have to tell you,’ he said, passing cups down to us, ‘begins a long, long time ago in the small town of Brunau-am-Inn, Austria in the year 1889. Brunau is a dull, provincial little town today, and it was a dull provincial little town then. Nothing ever happened there. Life just went on, birth, marriages, death, birth, marriages, death. The local round of the market, the inn, the church and of course, gossip.’ Family History The waters of death ‘Gossip,’ said Winship, banging down his coffee cup, ‘that’s all this place is. A great hypermart of gossip.’

289

‘So, what do you expect?’ said Axel, dabbing the froth of chocolate from his moustache with a college napkin. ‘Yes, but there’s go,ssip and there’s gossip. I make one casual remark to a student and before I know it, the Faculty Professor is breathing fire and brimstone and prophesying a budget disaster. I never said the Sorbonne had beaten us to it. I merely said that Patrice Duroc would probably get there first.’ ‘You think that’s true?’ ‘Well, it’s possible,’ said Winship. ‘And, frankly who cares? There’s such a thing as the wider fellowship of science, you know.’ Axel chuckled deeply. ‘You believe that? You really believe that?’ ‘Well, as far as Berlin is concerned, it doesn’t matter who gets there first, does it? So long as it’s Europe, not America. But the budget-masters, Jesus, the budget- masters. You’d think it was the future of civilisation at stake.’ ‘You’re not saying that you don’t believe in internal competition?’ Axel said in mock horror. ‘Well, it’s all right for you. Your work is so “important” you can get any money you like for it. How’s it going by the way? Close to getting somewhere or is it all still, as I hear, all pi r squared in the sky?’ ‘You know I can’t talk about it, Jeremy,’ said Axel gently. ‘Yah, what’s the point of talking about anything?’ Winship rose heavily. ‘Heigh ho, back to the grindstone. Are you off to the labs? I could do with a ride.’ ‘Sorry to disoblige, but I have a gentle afternoon of teaching in college.’ ‘Well sod you then,’ said Winship, in English. ‘I understood that,’ said Axel with a smile. They parted outside the door of the Senior Combination Room. Axel stood for a while sniffing the gentle spring air and then walked at a leisurely pace to the porter’s lodge. ‘Morning, Bill.’

290

‘Morning, Professor Bauer.’ ‘Summer is on the way.’ ‘Not before time, sir. Not before time.’ Axel looked vaguely at his pigeon-hole. Stuffed as usual with useless pamphlets and reminders. Another time, he would clear it another time. ‘You got the message then, did you sir?’ Axel turned. ‘Message? What message?’ ‘A teleform for you. Urgent they said. Young Henry called your rooms but you weren’t there.’ ‘I’ve been at lunch.’ ‘I believe Henry posted it through your oak, sir, but I have the master copy here.’ ‘Ah, thank you.’ ‘You’ll see that it’s from Germany,’ said Bill handing over a yellow envelope. ‘From Berlin,’ he added with a wistful blend of awe and curiosity. Axel felt for his reading-glasses and tore open the envelope. Professor Axel Bauer St Matthew’s College Cambridge ENGLAND Dear Professor Bauer, We regret to inform you that your father, Freiherr Dietrich Bauer, is very seriously ill. We have done everything we can here to make him more comfortable, but it is my duty to advise you that it is most unlikely that he will be with us for more than a week. He has expressed an urgent desire to see you and if you are able to arrange this with your employers I would strongly suggest that you come as soon as possible. With friendly greetings Rosa Mendel (Director) Axel was exhausted by the time he arrived at Flughafen Speer. The plane, a Messerschmidt Pfeil 6, had been crowded with businessmen whose sharp suits and absurd attention to their portable computers had made him feel shabby and out of place. The stewardesses, it seemed to him, had treated him as if they too felt he was an inferior

291

being. Ah well, the days of respect for academics and scientists were over. Today it was commerce that Europe valued and it was the businessmen who, having exploited what the scientists and technologists had done for the world, now reaped the rewards and garnered the honours. Honours! It was only half-way through the flight, pondering on this noisy, brash new world around him, that Axel realised with a bolt of surprise that he must soon and as a matter of course inherit his father’s barony. Freiherr Axel Bauer. Ridiculous. Maybe this explained the extraordinary courtesy and helpfulness the University authorities had shown him when he applied for his week’s compassionate furlough. Somewhere in the files, he supposed, he was written down as the son of a Reichsheld, a Hero of Greater Germany. Nobody had much time for such Gloderite chivalric nonsense these days, but there were still enough sentimentalists and snobs around to ensure that a real live genuine Baron of the Reich got attention. Good tables in restaurants at least. And perhaps, when he updated his credit cards and papers, a little more service and respect from these stewardesses … The authorities in London and Berlin too had been exceptionally cooperative considering the high secrecy of the project which he and his colleagues were working on at Cambridge. They didn’t like it when unmarried men working in sensitive fields travelled, even when it was within Europe. Married men, men with wives and children left behind, the authorities were comfortable enough with them. Nonetheless, they had waved his paperwork through politely and speedily. The taxi-ride from the hotel in the Kurfurstendamm, in a brand new DW Electric - Germany still got the new models first, he noticed, whatever the avowed public policy might be - was comfortable enough, but while his eyes

292

looked admiringly out the window as they sped through the Tiergarten and past the statues, pavilions and towers erected to the greater glory of Gloder, his thoughts were all for the dying man he was about to visit. This father about whom he knew so little. Since the death of his mother in the 1960s, Axel had exchanged two letters with the man. Nothing more. Not even cards at Christmas. The Director of the Wannsee Hospital was a calm, efficient young woman who, standing under an original oil portrait of Gloder in the lobby, reminded Axel of one of those archetypes of German Womanhood in fifties musical shows and films. ‘I won’t keep you long, Herr Professor,’ she said. ‘You are a man of science, you will not wish me to raise false hopes. Your father has cancer of the liver. He is too old I am afraid, for any hope of success with transplantation.’ Bauer nodded. How old was the old man in fact? Eighty- nine? Ninety? How appalling not to be able to remember. ‘How is he in his mind, Frau Direktorin?’ ‘His mind is good. First class. Since he heard you were coming, he has been much more at peace. You will follow me please?’ Their heels echoed on polished marble tiles as they walked. They passed through an arched corridor, one side of which was glazed and gave over a long, sweeping lawn that led down to the lake. Axel could see old men and women being wheeled about in the sun, each with their own starched attendant. ‘This place,’ he said, gesturing. ‘It seems to be magnificently endowed.’ ‘It is reserved,’ Frau Mendel said proudly, ‘exclusively for heroes of the Reich. There are not so many of that generation left. A little piece of history. When the last of them goes, I don’t know what will happen here. You are aware, I hope, that all the expenses of your father’s funeral will be met?’ ‘It will be a state funeral then?’

293

She rocked her head from side to side to indicate a yes and a no. ‘Officially it is a state funeral. Naturally. But these days …’ she raised her arms apologetically. ‘No, no, that’s fine,’ Axel assured her. ‘I prefer something private. Truly.’ ‘So,’ said Frau Mendel stopping in front of a large pedimented door, painted in eau-de-nil. ‘The Freiherr’s quarters.’ She knocked briskly three times with the sharp end of her middle knuckles and entered without waiting for a reply. Axel’s father was slumped down in a wheelchair, his head on his chest, fast asleep. Axel felt he never would have recognised him; never in a thousand years. He had evolved from the brisk, white- coated father of memory into a generic Old Man. He had Old Man’s yellow skin, Old Man’s bony legs, Old Man’s wet mouth, Old Man’s breath and Old Man’s wisps of hair, all of which pervaded the room with Old Man’s odour. Somehow even the sunlight that streamed through the windows had been transformed into Old Man’s sun, the kind of bright, prickly warmth only felt in retirement homes. Frau Mendel’s hand was on his shoulder. ‘Freiherr, Freiherr! Your son has arrived. Here is Axel’ The Old Man’s skull slowly rose and Axel looked into his father’s watery eyes. Yes, perhaps there was something there that he might have recognised. The pupils were surrounded by a corona of yellow fatty tissue that narrowed the width of iris, but there was a soul looking out through those clouded rings of cobalt blue that Axel recognised as belonging to his father. ‘Hello Papa!’ he said, and was amazed to feel in his own eyes the springing up of tears. ‘Milk.’ ‘Milk?’ ‘Milk!’ ‘Milk? You want milk?’ Axel turned in some confusion to Frau Mendel.

294

‘He is just waking up. Usually when he wakes up after his afternoon sleep he has a glass of warm milk.’ ‘Papa, it is Axel. Axel, your son.’ Axel watched the clouds in the eyes begin to clear. ‘Axel. You are here.’ The voice was husked and fogged, but Axel knew it and was transported by it at once to his childhood home in Miinster. A great feeling of love overwhelmed him, overwhelmed him with its own force and overwhelmed him perhaps more greatly with surprise at its existence. A cold hand came up to pat his own. ‘Thank you for coming,’ his father said. ‘It was kind.’ ‘Nonsense, not kind. A pleasure. A pleasure.’ ‘No, no. It was kind. I would like you to wheel me outside. To the garden.’ Frau Mendel nodded her approval and held the door open while Axel manoeuvred the chair into the corridor. ‘Just follow it along to the end and then turn left through the door and down the ramp into the garden. If you need anything there is a button on the arm of the wheelchair.’ Axel tried to open a conversation about the beauty of the landscape and the lake, but was cut off. ‘That way, Axel. Take me that way. Past the cedar of Lebanon, towards the lake, there is a path no one takes.’ Axel wheeled his father across the lawn and past the tree as he was bid. He nodded to attendants and loyal family members who were doing much the same as himself all around. One old man was sitting on a bench in pyjamas talking to himself; on his pyjama jacket, Axel saw with amusement, were pinned more than a dozen medals. ‘Here, here! It is private here,’ his father said, leaning forward to urge the wheelchair on. Axel pushed him, as directed, along the pathway towards an opening in a variegated box hedge. They went through into a small, horseshoe-shaped flower garden.

295

‘Pull my chair round so that we can face the entrance,’ said his father. ‘There, you sit on the bench. Now we will know if anyone comes.’ ‘The sun isn’t too hot? Perhaps I should fetch a hat.’ ‘Never mind the sun. I am a dying man. I am sure they told you that. What does a dying man want with a hat?’ Axel nodded. It seemed a fair point. ‘When I die, you will inherit my title, you know this?’ ‘I haven’t given it much thought, Papa.’ ‘Liar! I bet you have thought about little else for years. Well, I want to tell you what the title stands for.’ ‘It is a mark of distinction for services rendered to the Reich.’ ‘Yes, yes. But that is not what I mean. You have no idea why the Fiihrer gave me the honour, have you?’ ‘No, Papa.’ ‘No one has, or if they did know they are dead and the secret has died with them. But if I am to bequeath an honour to you, it is only right, is it not, that I pass on the story of how it was won? There is no land with the title, only this story. So I want you to sit still and listen. Have you learned how to sit still?’ ‘I believe so, Papa.’ ‘Good. You may give me a cigarette?’ ‘I only smoke a pipe, Papa, and that is with my luggage at the hotel.’ ‘Oh? I had been looking forward to a cigarette.’ ‘Perhaps I can find you one?’ ‘No, no. Sit down, it’s of no great matter. At my age the pleasure lies in the contemplation not the act. But you will find a bottle of schnapps in the table at the back of my chair.’ ‘In the pocket, you mean?’ ‘Yes, yes. Pocket, that is what I said.’ No matter, thought Axel. Tasche and Tisch were not so unalike as words. If that was the extent of the senility he was to look forward to himself, then perhaps age wasn’t so much to be feared.

296

He found the bottle, unscrewed the lid and passed it to his father, who took a large swig and passed it back, his eyes running. ‘Sit still and listen. Don’t talk, just listen. The story I am about to tell you is known to very few people in the world. It is a great secret. A great secret. You understand?’ Axel nodded. ‘It all begins in the small town of Brunau-am-Inn, Austria, exactly one hundred years ago. You have heard of Brunau?’ Axel shook his head. ‘Ha! Exactly. No one has. I have no doubt it is as undistinguished a dorf today as it was then, no different in fact from any other dusty little town in that part of the Habsburg Empire. Brunau was a dull provincial place then and I am sure it is the same now. Nothing ever happened there. Life went on, birth, marriages, death, birth, marriages, death. History passed it by. ‘But one hundred years ago a young physician in this small town, he made a discovery, an extraordinary discovery that was to change the world. He had no idea of this, of course, this physician. His name, by the way, was Horst Schenck. He was not an eminent man of science you must understand, he was merely starting out in life as a family doctor in a small town, full of ideals and hopes no doubt, in keeping with the age, but academically he was most undistinguished, I assure you. A second-class brain at best Like many of his type and generation, he kept a full and faithful diary of his medical round, which for the most part makes very dull reading indeed. So, we have a dull young doctor in a dull town in a dull part of the world. But the discovery he made, this was not dull, not dull at all. ‘One day in 1889 a young woman comes to see him, blushing in confusion and distress. Her name is, let me think … good God, there was a time when I knew Schenck’s diary for those years by heart, absolutely by heart … Hitler! That was it, Klara Hitler, nee Plotsl or

297

some such name. This Frau Hitler comes to see Herr Doctor Schenck because she and her husband have been unable to conceive. At first the Doctor thinks there is nothing unusual in this. Her husband Alois, some kind of petty official with the customs office, is fifty-four years old, nearly twice this Klara’s age. She has been delivered of three babies already, but none has survived infancy. Alois has fathered plenty of children from other liaisons, but maybe now he has simply reached the end of his fruitful life, you understand? Or maybe the three unsuccessful births the wife has undergone, maybe they have mangled up her insides. Maybe also, Schenck notes in his diary, there is truth to the rumour that this pair are in fact uncle and niece - such are the ways of these provincial backwaters - and we all know the dangers attendant upon the union of such close blood relatives. Frau Hitler is desperate to have a child however and begs for the doctor’s help. He examines her, finds nothing wrong, aside from evidence of beatings - again common enough in those places in those times - so he suggests that she keep trying, notes the circumstances in his diary and thinks no more about it. ‘The good doctor was surprised, however, when two days later another young woman, a Frau Leona Hartmann came to him reporting a very similar set of circumstances. She was the mother of two healthy young girls and for a year she and her husband had tried to produce another child without success. Now, it so happens that the Hartmanns lived in the same street as the Hitlers. Schenck noted this coincidence in his diary, but attached no especial significance to it. But by the end of the following week two more women, a Frau Maria Steinitz and a Frau Claudia Mann had also been to see him, also complaining that they were unable to conceive. They too lived in the same street. ‘A coincidence, it must all have been a coincidence, Schenck decided, for the very next day he attended a birth in that selfsame street and the mother was safely

298

delivered of a healthy boy, no complications, no problems. Indeed in the next door house but one, the wife of the family was joyfully, robustly pregnant too. We must not forget that Austria was a Roman Catholic country then, and these were the days before the phrase “family planning” had ever been heard. Just one of those strange coincidences then, which doctors often find in their daily round. No significance, no importance. Just bad luck on those barren women. ‘It was only as he was leaving the house that Schenck looked across at the houses opposite and it struck him that all the women who had been to see him lived on the other side of the street. ‘Schenck had naturally examined these women in so far as he was able and was not able to find anything that, superficially at least, could explain such a strangely localized outbreak of infertility. ‘It soon turned out however, that there was no need to examine the women further. After a day’s thought, Schenck persuaded one of the husbands, Otto Steinitz, who was a cousin of his, to provide him with a sample of his semen. The sample he was given he examined under a microscope. He found it to be entirely free of spermatozoa. He persuaded other men on the same side of the street, the west side, to offer him samples. Some refused indignantly, but of those who donated, all were found to have entirely sterile seminal fluid. He tested the men on the east side of the street and found that their sperm count was entirely normal. What do you think of that?’ Axel, faintly disgusted by the hand-rubbing glee and chuckling relish with which his father was telling the story, shrugged. ‘The soil, I suppose. Possibly the water- supply. Some spermicidal agent …” ‘Exactly! A child could see that. Even our hero, the dull doctor Schenck, was smart enough to realise that the answer must lie in either of those directions. The most obvious explanation, the correct explanation as it turned

299

out, was to be found with the water-supply. Schenck discovered that there was a mains pipe that divided at the head of the street, feeding an east cistern and a west cistern. Water was manually forced up by the householders from pumps in the back garden of each house. ‘Schenck immediately took numerous samples of the water from both sides, tested it on pigs and then, in great alarm, alerted the health officers in Innsbruck. There is an especially amusing diary entry written in highly flustered nineteenth century euphemism, in which Schenck describes the business of persuading male pigs to yield up their semen for examination. The poor man was not a vet, after all, eh? More schnapps, please.’ Axel passed over the bottle, marvelling at the vulgarity of the older generation. The Founding Generation, they called themselves. They had no time for the mealy- mouthed primness of the young. ‘A true Nazi’s language wears no fine silk,’ as Gloder used to say. Except in the company of women, naturally … when respect and propriety are all. ‘So,’ said the old man, licking schnapps from his lips, ‘there you have it. The householders on the western side of the street from that day onwards obtained their water from their healthy neighbours on the east side. A few years later the households were switched to a direct mains supply and the problem was never heard of again, not a single new outbreak of male sterility was ever recorded. Schenck records m his diary however, that not one of the infected men ever regained his fertility. Each one of them remained sterile until the day they died. ‘The authorities in Innsbruck reported the matter to Vienna. The leading Viennese scientists - epidemiologists, pathologists, histologists, chemists, biologists, geologists, mineralogists, botanists, they all analysed samples of the water but no one could discover what was wrong with it or what substance it might contain

300

that had done this damage. Minute quantities of the water were tested on animals and it was found to have the same permanent sterilising effect on all male mammals.’ ‘That’s simply astounding!’ said Axel, his scientific interest now fully awakened. ‘Astounding indeed. Astounding and utterly unprecedented. Nowhere in the world has such a case ever been reported before or since.’ ‘I never heard about it or read about it. Surely ‘Of course you didn’t. This was Imperial Austro-Hungary, and in the interests of averting panic and prurient interest, the matter was never publicised. Schenck was not allowed to write a paper on the epidemic, a restriction which annoyed him intensely, frustrating his dreams of medical glory and world fame. He moans endlessly about this in his diary. ‘So, a medical mystery. Not by any means the strangest in the history of science, but unusual and intriguing all the same. Nothing more was heard of this strange contamination of the water in Brunau for many years. The Great War came and went, followed by the collapse of the Habsburg Empire. Finally, in 1937, more than fifty years after Klara Hitler paid him that first tearful visit, Horst Schenck dies. He had managed to preserve three fifty-litre carboys of Brunau Water, all that remained of his original sample. These he leaves, together with his diary, to his old medical school in Innsbruck, Austria. That very year, I should remind you, Austria has become part of the Greater German Reich. ‘The newly formed Reichsministerium of Science instantly impounds the diary and the samples of Brunau Water and throws down a massive blanket of secrecy. The scientists fall on these flagons of strange water like lions on antelopes. They analyse it, they test it, they bombard it with radiation, they swirl it round in centrifuges, they vibrate it in vibrators, they condense it in condensers, evaporate it in evaporators, mix it, boil it, dry it, freeze it,

301

they do everything they can to unlock its tantalising secret. ‘The Fiihrer, you see, he understands the importance of this Brunau Water to the security of the Reich. The glamorous men at the Gottingen Institute are dreaming up a bomb for him, but perhaps that won’t work. A little insurance is important to him. If Bolshevism cannot be eradicated one way, maybe it can be eradicated another. That is how the thinking went. ‘Well, as we all know, Gottingen in the end produced the goods for him, the bomb was born, goodbye Moscow, see you later, Leningrad. The freedom of the Reich was secured and Europe set free. So much is public history. ‘But meanwhile two very brilliant men at Mtinster continue to work on this damned Brunau Water. They are, of course, your godfather Johannes Kremer and myself, your noble parent. We had been given access to all the previous research, everything from Schenck’s original diary to all the latest analyses of this frustrating fluid. You’ll find the diary in the back table of my chair. The back pocket, the back pocket of the chair. Take it out.’ Axel took out the diary, an old leather book, stained and frayed at its edges and held together with a brass clasp. ‘That is the volume that covers the years 1886 to 1901. Very tedious reading it is too, most of it. But there, it’s yours. No one knows I’ve held on to it all these years. Keep it now. Keep it.’ Til keep it,’ Axel assured him. He noticed a note of hysteria creeping into his father’s voice which he did not like. ‘It was I, not Kremer, who unlocked the secret of Brunau Water. We worked together, he was the senior partner of course, but it was I who succeeded in isolating and synthesising the active spermicidal compound. What we would now understand as a freak genetic mutation - that science was then in its infancy of course - had somehow taken place naturally in such organic matter as existed in the cistern. The effect on the male body took place at

302

such a deep level within the human gene that it was no surprise previous generations of doctors had been unable to comprehend its working. I was incapable of grasping the full meaning myself until much, much later. But I was able to synthesise the agent, that is the point. It was brilliant work, brilliant! Years ahead of its time.’ Axel stared at his father, at the bright light shining from his watering eyes and the twisting hands in his lap; the knuckle bones writhed under the skin and every yellowed ball and socket of their joints showed through. ‘The Fiihrer was delighted. Ecstatic! I had met him before of course. He had personally come to open the Institute of Advanced Medical Studies at Miinster University and made one of his great speeches about science and nature. But that was just a handshake in a long line-up. This time … oh, this time! We were provided with a car, the long black DW2S, you remember them? We were driven to Berlin, to the Reichs Chancellery itself and there we spent four hours alone with just the Fiihrer, Reichsminister Himmler and Reichsminister Heydrich. Just the three of them and Kremer and me. Imagine! Afterwards, dinner with dancing and music. An incredible day! Perhaps you remember me going? I brought back presents and a signed photograph of the Fiihrer.’ Axel did remember. To Axel Bauer - Crow up to be as fine a man as your father! Rudolf Gloder He still had it somewhere. In a trunk in Cambridge he supposed. Axel remembered too standing on the back of a sofa, his face pressed against the glass window of the morning room, waiting for his father to return. He remembered the great black car swinging into their street, a flag on each front wing. Other children across the street stopped and stared, he remembered, dropped their footballs or stood up in their bicycles to watch. He remembered the chauffeur stepping smartly out to open the door for Papa. He remembered the smiles, the hugs, the happiness

303

pervading the whole household for weeks later, until they moved from Miinster for ever. ‘The Fiihrer had a great enterprise for us to undertake, Axi. He wanted Kremer and me to synthesise this water of Brunau on a large scale. He wanted us to set up a small manufacturing plant, somewhere discreet. We chose a little out of the way town in Poland called Auschwitz. The Brunau Water was to be produced in the greatest secrecy of course and with superhuman care. Each flask to be numbered, sealed in wax and accounted for. They were to be used in a great task, the greatest task then facing us, now that Russia had been defeated and absorbed into the Reich, and Europe was stable and free of Bolshevism. The water of Brunau was to be used, in the Fiihrer’s words, “to cleanse the Reich, as Hercules had cleansed the Augean stables. All the filth of Europe will be washed away.” For my part in this historic achievement a barony was bestowed upon me in 1949. That is what you are inheriting, Axel. That is the title you will shortly own. Freiherr Bauer, the destroyer of a whole race of men. God forgive me, son. God forgive us all. Christ Jesus have mercy upon me.’ Ten minutes later, Axel pressed the red button on the wheelchair’s right arm and walked calmly through the gap in the hedge. He saw a figure in white running towards him across the lawn. ‘Is there a problem, sir?’ ‘My father … I can find no pulse. I think he is dead.’ Official History Talking in his sleep ‘Bauer died in a Berlin retirement home, July 1989,’ said Brown. ‘Kremer, the senior partner in their little manufacturing enterprise, he had curled up his toes fifteen years earlier, no one is quite sure where. Now you may be wanting to know how we found all this out. “Jeez, you guys have sure as heckfire got some smart agents working for you,” is what you’re thinking. Sorry, but that just ain’t so. We know all this on account of Professor

304

Bauer’s son, Axel, who has become our friend. Weren’t for him, we wouldn’t know Jack Poop.’ I dunked the last of the chocolate chip cookies into cold coffee. My father was looking down at his hands, which were folded neatly on the table in front of him. Hubbard’s eyes were closed. No one was watching me, but still I maintained a face that I hoped was innocent of any traces of the thundering torment inside. ‘And that pretty much brings us to the end of the tale,’ said Brown, turning to the window and looking through the thick velvet curtains at the brightening sky. ‘Axel decided to stop by outside the American consular gates in Venice, Italy two years ago and ring the doorbell. He was in town as a member of a European Physics Convention, representing Cam … representing the institution he was working for at the time, it needn’t concern us where that was … and he asked to be allowed to come over to us. So happens that he worked in a field which was of great interest to the scientific community here, so he’d have been worth his weight in gold to us whatever his background. But see, the reason he wanted to defect was guilt. Couldn’t take the discovery that he was the son of the man who wiped the Jews from the face of Europe. So after we’d smuggled him safely out of Italy and gotten him on United States soil, he spilled us the whole story between great gulps of grief and howls of anti-Reich rage. Showed us the original Austrian Doctor’s diary and all the documentation his father had managed to keep. Enough to convince us that it was all true, the whole nasty tale, from Chestnut Soup to Pumpkin Pie.’ My father straightened his back and looked up at the ceiling. ‘But why wasn’t this story announced? Why wasn’t the world immediately informed? I should imagine the propaganda value alone would be ‘Would be what, Colonel? It’s history. It’s over. What’s done is done. May sound harsh, but that’s a fact. Everyone responsible, so far as we know, is dead. Europe has changed. Our relationship with Europe has changed.

305

What would happen if we told the world? All the Jews in America and Canada would be up in arms, for sure. Every liberal and intellectual would leap on the moral bandwagon and cry vengeance. Then what? Armageddon? Either that or a mighty embarrassing climb- down. Who wins either way? It’s history. It’s all just history. Might as well make a stink about the Black Hole of Calcutta or the Salem Witch Trials.’ My father nodded his head briefly. He tried to take it well but I saw his shoulders sag a little and a tired look come into his eyes. Too much pride there, I supposed, to allow him to express any outrage at the nuts and bolts of realpolitik, only a worn-out, Very well then, it’s your world, I’ll leave it to you and your generation’ kind of resignation. ‘So,’ said Brown. ‘We return to the cute part of this little story. Me, I’ve read the diary of the Austrian doctor, Horst Schenck. But Mr Hubbard here, he hasn’t read it, have you, Tom?’ Hubbard shook his head. ‘My agency director has read it. Axel Bauer, now working for us with a new name and a heart full of vengeance against all things European, he brought it to us, so you can be sure as shooting that he’s read it. We allowed the President of the United States to take a peep at a neatly typed digest … hell, it was only polite. The Vice- President, well now, he’s never had so much as a smell of the consarned thing. Same goes for the Secretary for State. Far as I know, only twelve people in this whole country have ever even heard of Horst Schenck’s diary. So what we need you to tell us, Mikey, is how come, in conversation with your friend Mr Steve Burns yesterday afternoon, how come you attached such importance to that self-same one-horse township of Brunau-am-Inn where the whole story begins and how come you mentioned the names Polzl and Hitler, the very names of the first couple to visit Doctor Schenck all the way back in

306

1889? And Auschwitz where Bauer and Kroner ended up in 1942. How come you know about that? I think we have a right to know. You see what I’m saying?’ All eyes were on me now. What harm could they do me? The worst crime I had committed in their eyes was that I had happened upon sensitive information. They didn’t really believe I was some engineered clone of the real Michael Young, planted in Princeton to spy on the United States government. They couldn’t believe that. It was unthinkable. They could never guess, not in a million, million years the real truth, which was more unthinkable yet. That most awful truth that only now was rearing up, dragon-shaped from the swamp of emotions within me. That most awful truth that it was I, Michael Young, who had contaminated the waters of Brunau. That it was I, Michael Young, who was the genocide. They would find it easier to believe that I was an android from another galaxy or a shaman endowed with paranormal powers to whom the diary of Horst Schenck had appeared in a dream. Anything would be easier for them to believe than the truth. It was not what I could tell Hubbard or Brown that consumed me, however. What consumed me was what they had already told me. What they had told me about Leo, about Axel, or whatever name he might now be usinc Wliat we had done - and done, I now saw, more out of a desire to relieve Leo of his miserable inheritance of guilt than out of any altruism or high humanitarian purpose - what we had done had not loosened the tentacles of history that had been gripping him so remorselessly back in that earlier world. No, those tentacles were now clutched about his throat more tightly than ever: they had strangled the life out of a whole people, out of the whole world. And me? It was one hell of a Big Wednesday for Keanu Young, PhDude. The history surfer, hanging nine on the

307

point break of yesterday. Tubing it through the big rollers of tide and time. Why had I agreed to help Leo in the first place? Cockiness? A desire to feel big? No, it was simpler than that, I decided. Stupidity. It was just plain stupidity. Or perhaps, at a pinch, stupidity’s sweet baby brother, innocence. Maybe even cowardice. The world I lived in was too scary for me, so why not make another? ‘We’re waiting, Mikey,’ Hubbard was tapping a pencil gently on the table. I took a deep breath. It was a gamble, but I had kind of gotten used to the ways of history by now. I was beginning to be able to read her. Somehow I knew it just had to be. ‘Well, you know,’ I said. ‘I’ve been thinking about this and I guess I must have met him.’ Brown’s friendly eyes rested on me. ‘Met who, cowboy?’ ‘This guy you were talking about. Not met him exactly. Seen him.’ My father slapped the table impatiently with the palm of his hand. ‘Which “guy”, Michael? Talk sense.’ ‘This Axel Baum or whatever his name was.’ ‘Bauer? Axel Bauer? You think you’ve met Axel Bauer?’ Hubbard could not hide the excitement in his voice. ‘Well, it might not have been him,’ I said, considering carefully. ‘But it’s the only explanation I can think of.’ ‘When did you meet him?’ ‘Where?’ The two questions simultaneously from Hubbard and Brown. I swallowed silently. This was where the gamble lost or won. I chose Hubbard’s as the easiest eyes to meet. ‘When? I’m not sure. It was a couple of weeks ago. On a train, New Jersey transit. I took a trip one time up to New York City. There was this guy in the seat across from me. I mean it might not have been him. I mean, your guy, for all I know he’s on the West Coast …’

308

Loathsome as the gesture might be, I came within a touch of executing the exultant Macaulay Culkin Yes! complete with triumphal fist-pump. Because I could see, I could clearly see, from the expression, from the lack of expression, in Hubbard’s eyes, that I had hit it right on the nose. Leo had been relocated here. To Princeton. I might well have seen him on a New Jersey Transit company train. It wasn’t beyond the bounds of possibility. ‘You’re saying you talked to Axel Bauer on a train from Princeton to New York City?’ ‘No, not at all. We never exchanged a word as far as I can remember. He was asleep the whole journey. It’s just that … well, he spoke.’ Brown’s eyebrows shot up. ‘And I know it sounds crazy,’ I said, ‘but I was fascinated. I’d never heard anyone talk in their sleep before. I mean really talk. There was just him and me, no one else close by, so I started to write it down, you know? I thought it was cool.’ ‘Cool? I don’t understand.’ ‘Oh, I’m sorry, that’s a kind of new slang thing. I thought it was neat. I thought maybe I could use it. Being a philosophy major and all? So I wrote some of the words down.’ I could sense Hubbard wanting to look at Brown and Brown willing him not to turn round or show any sign of weakness or hesitancy. ‘Anyhow, when I was back in school that night, in my dorm, I started playing around with some of the words I had written down. There was lots of them. Martyr was one, or maybe it was a woman’s name, Marthe. Miinster, he said, you know, like the cheese. Nazi. Hitler. But I’m pretty sure it was Adolf, not what you said. Alois? I remember Adolf, but of course, k was hard to tell, I mean the guy was asleep, right? We were in a moving train. Then there was Perltsl. That’s what it sounded like. Brunau-am-Inn, he kept saying that. “What happened in Brunau-am-Inn, Upper Austria?” Guess that’s why I always

309

had it down as a place name. Time after time he said that. Another word, sounded like Schickelgruber to me, but obviously that doesn’t mean anything to you, so maybe I had that down wrong. And he said that other name you mentioned. Kremer? Only he said it in full. Johannes Paul Kremer, pretty sure that was it. And Auschwitz. Another one too, Dachau, it sounded like, but that doesn’t seem to mean anything to you either. So I started to write these names down and try and construct a story out of them. I mean, it was obvious the guy was German. And he was old. Only some of the names he mentioned were English. I mean real English English. Cambridge University. Saint Matthew’s College. Hawthorn Tree Court. Porter’s lodge. King’s Parade. Stuff like that. Didn’t mean diddley to me, but I tried to make up a history for him, like about how maybe he was a refugee from the old Nazi days? And this really got to me, for days I was going around thinking real hard about this old guy. Something in his eyes, there was something spooky in his eyes. Really bugged me. I thought maybe I could write a short story about him, a movie even. You know how you get these crazy notions in your head. I decided he was a German Nazi who had gone to live in England, but that he had some guilty secret. I started to do some research about where he might go and what he might do. You know, looked up Cambridge, England in the library, stuff like that. Then, last night, I got wasted with some of the guys. I bang my head on a wall and my mind goes all weird. I’m going around the place next morning half in and half out of this imagined world. I forget the most basic things, the Gettysburg Address, I mean, jeez, can you beat that? But at the same time I remember all this weird stuff clearly, like it was more real than the real world, and my accent goes, all blooey.’ I shook my head with the wonder of it all, as if I were still waking up. My father leaned forward and gripped my arm.-’For the Lord’s sake, Michael. How many times must I tell you to

310

speak properly? Why is it always “stuff and “weird” and “neat” and “guys”? You’re a Princeton man, can’t you utter a single coherent sentence in decent English?’ ‘My kid’s the same,’ said Hubbard. ‘And he’s at Harvard.’ ‘He’s at Harvard and he can speak? I said with incredulity. ‘You must be very proud, sir.’ The tension was easing a little, I could sense that. Leo had taken flight from St Matthew’s Cambridge to Venice. From Venice to Washington. Now he was here, in Princeton. I was as sure of that as I was of anything. There was, surely, every possibility that he had been on a train to New York City in the last month? My memory loss could cover any gaps. Hubbard and Brown would have a hard time proving I was an out-and-out liar. They might suspect me, but what kind of a danger to anyone or anything did I pose? ‘What took you to New York, Mikey?’ Hubbard asked. I shrugged. ‘Hey, what else? The Yankees.’ ‘You a Yankees fan?’ ‘You should see his bedroom,’ my father said. ‘His sheets are black and white striped.’ ‘Yeah? Me, I’m a fan of the Brooklyn Dodgers.’ ‘Somebody’s gotta be,’ I said. Brown spoke for the first time. ‘This man on the train. You say his eyes got to you.’ ‘Really bugged me.’ ‘Seems strange,’ said Brown, ‘that the eyes of a sleeping man should have such an effect.’ ‘He woke up when we got to New York,’ I said, my mmd frantically racing to remember something Steve had mentioned earlier. Not Grand Central, it wasn’t Grand Central Station. What the pants was it called? Ha! Got it. ‘When we stopped at Penn Station, he stood up and I saw his eyes. And you know, on top of this, like, monolog he’d been coming out with …” ‘He wasn’t wearing eye-glasses, then?’ Brown sounded surprised.

311

‘Nope,’ I said with conviction. ‘Though come to think …’ I screwed my eyes up as if trying to picture the scene. ‘Come to think, there was a pair of glasses in the breast pocket of his coat. Yeah, I’m pretty sure of that.’ ‘And what color were these remarkable eyes?’ ‘Brightest blue you ever saw. Kind of younger than his complexion if you know what I mean. A real piercing cobalt blue.’ ‘And was his beard white or grey?’ Beard! Double pants … This was a problem. He had a beard at Cambridge when I knew him, but that was another life. Then he was Leo Zuckermann, living out the identity his father had left him with. That was a Jewish identity and Leo had played it to the hilt. But would he have a beard now? Very few of the older people I had seen in Princeton had beards. He would want to blend in, surely, as much as possible. On the other hand, if he was clean-shaven in Germany, maybe he had grown a beard as part of his new identity in the United States. It was a tough one. ‘Simple question, my friend,’ said Brown. ‘Was the beard white or grey?’ ‘Well it’s a simple enough question, okay,’ I said, frowning in some perplexity. ‘But see, I’m trying to work out whether you’re laying traps because you think I’m lying, or whether this man we’re talking about really did have a beard when you knew him and it’s just a misunderstanding. Because the guy I’m talking about, he was clean-shaven. His hair was kind of silvery grey, salt and pepper I guess you’d call it. Receding up to about here.’ ‘And if we showed you photographs of a few people, you’d be able to pick him out.’ ‘Every time,’ I said, all my assurance back again. ‘This was not a face I’d ever forget.’ Brown sat down at the table for the first time. ‘Well, son,’ he said. ‘I must confess that when I asked you to tell me how you knew about Brunau, I could not begin to imagine





Unknown




312

what you were going to say. Professor Simon Taylor, as you might have guessed, he told us about you. Said there was something maybe a little fishy going on, might be worth our attention. We took the liberty of dropping by and following you about the town yesterday afternoon. When I heard you talking about the Hitlers and Brunauam- Inn and all, just plain out in the open air like that, I gotta tell you I darn near jumped clean out of my slacks. Seemed to me just incredible that a young college student could come up with those names and still be on the level and according to Hoyle. But I guess your explanation is the only one that makes sense. You listened to an old man talking in his sleep. Maybe I should have worked it out for myself. Like Sherlock Holmes used to say, when you have eliminated the impossible then what you got left, no matter how unlikely, well, it just plain must be the truth.’ It was Hubbard’s turn to stand now. He drew back the curtains and the strong, white light of dawn filled the room, making my eyes ache. My father rose too, unsteadily. ‘So we can take our son home now?’ ‘You can do what the Sam Hill you please with him, Colonel. I’m only sorry to have taken up so much of your time. But you heard the story I had to tell, it was worth checking out.’ ‘I understand.’ ‘And you understand, don’t you, Mikey, that oath you swore?’ I nodded as I too stood and stretched. Goose-pimples were breaking out on my thighs in the chilly air. I couldn’t believe I was still wearing the same damned pair of chino shorts I had pulled on the previous morning. A sudden thought struck me. ‘What about Steve?’ I asked. ‘What have you done with him?’ ‘Done with him? We haven’t done anything with him, Mikey. He was back in his dormitory on campus hours ago.’

313

‘You’re quite wrong about him, you know,’ I said. ‘All that suspected homosexual stuff. I don’t know where you got that, but it’s not true. It’s just not true.’ Brown’s eyes widened slightly. ‘No? Well, we’re obliged for the information, Mikey.’ He nodded to me slowly, and I felt another chill run through me as he swung round to face my father. ‘You fixing to go straight on home, Colonel? We made a reservation at the Peacock Inn for you in Bayard Lane, fine place, very comfortable, may be more convenient.’ I turned quickly to my father. ‘That’s a much better idea, Dad, sir …’ Shit, what on earth do I call him? let’s go there and have breakfast. Much better than driving all the way to Connecticut.’ Oh no, I wasn’t leaving Princeton. Not until I’d found Bauer. Zuckermann. Whatever he was called now. Wherever he was now. Secret History A lonely life. ‘Well now this is what I call nice,’ my mother said, standing in the narrow hallway of the Peacock Inn, the boards creaking beneath her feet. ‘Like an English hotel,’ my father agreed, with a decisive, approving nod. An English hotel, I thought. Right. White painted steps had led us up to an outer porch, the kind on which old folks sit knitting in rocking-chairs while their grandchildren hide their baseball card collections in secret caches in the crawl space below. Inside there was no plastic, no smoked glass, no nylon carpeting, no mock raj cane furniture, no grey rag-rolling or futile stencilling on the walls, no pale green pseudo-chintzes, no collection of accessorised prints in ash frames, no scream of computer printout behind the reception desk, no cream plastic portcullis slammed down over a closed bar, no clattering of discarded peanuts through whining vacuum cleaner hoses in distant function rooms, no reek of last night’s Cuban Evening, no forlorn air of minimally

314

staffed, polyester-trousered failure -instead it was pleasantly dark, homey and, in an unforced, unpretentious, Grandma Moses kind of way, elegant and stylish. ‘When were you last in an English hotel?’ I asked my father. He grunted non-committally and we passed through into the dining room. Maybe under the Nazi hegemony all the hotels were still Agatha Christie palaces or cheery, Margaret Lockwood boarding houses. I doubted it somehow. The breakfast was good here. No maple syrup to drizzle on bacon and famous pancakes, but huge, fluffy muffins, shining Danish pastries, jugs of juice, huge china breakfast cups of coffee and a big plate of fruit. In an English hotel they would have called it a ‘Fresh Fruit Platter’, but here, the woman serving us, who looked as if she might have been the owner, said as she set it down on our table, ‘… and here’s a plate of fruit for you.’ I liked that. I bit into one of the muffins and a fat blueberry that I had no idea was hiding inside exploded its juice onto my tongue. ‘Ng,’ I said. ‘I’d no idea I was so hungry.’ ‘That’s it, honey. You tuck in,’ said my mother, slicing a grape in half and popping it into her mouth between forefinger and thumb. Somehow as if she had gloves on. ‘The young man who drove us down,’ said my father, who was tackling one of those pastries on which half an apricot sits, face down, looking like an egg yolk, ‘will be back in six hours. So we should all be able to get plenty of sleep before the journey home.’ ‘About that,’ I said. ‘I think I’ll stay on.’ My mother dropped her knife onto the plate and turned anxious eyes on me. ‘Darling!’ ‘No really,’ I said. ‘My memory is coming back all the time. I got … you know, work to do. It’s catch-up time.’

315

‘But you’re still sick. You ought to be getting some rest. Your memory will come back at home just as much as here. More. Think how pleased to see you Bella would be. You could go with her to all your favorite places.’ Bella? This was a new one. Til write to her,’ I said, patting my mother’s hand. ‘She’ll understand.’ My mother let go of my hand as if she’d been stung and let out a squeak. ‘Honey! You see, you just aren’t well yet.’ ‘Really, Mom, I’m fine. Truly.’ ‘Your brain is still a little funny. Writing to a dog … that’s just not normal, dear, and you know it.’ Oops. ‘It was a joke, Mom, that’s all. I was just kidding you.’ ‘Oh.’ A little mollified, my mother regained her composure. ‘Well, that’s very silly.’ We were talking in that strangely lowered tone in which families conduct conversations in restaurants, as if every other word was ‘cancer’. The effort was exhausting me. ‘Look,’ I said, in a normal voice that sounded like a bellow after what had gone before. ‘I have to stay here. There’s only a few more weeks in the semester.’ My father looked up from his newspaper. ‘Some sense in that, Mary.’ ‘It’s not like I’m running a fever or anything. If I forget stuff, Steve will remind me.’ My father frowned. ‘Who is this Steve Burns?’ he asked. ‘I don’t recall you mentioning him before.’ ‘Well, if not Steve, then Scott or Ronnie or Todd … any of the guys.’ ‘Todd Williams is a very nice young man,’ my mother said. ‘You remember his sister, Emily? You used to go to dances with her when the Williamses lived in Bridgeport.’ ‘Right. Sure. Nice people. Scott will look after me.’ ‘Well, it’s up to you, of course,’ my father said. He leaned forward and lowered his voice. ‘If I know those government people, they will still be interested in you.’ ‘Are you saying they didn’t believe me?’

316

‘Don’t be foolish. I’m just saying, son, that they check things out. Every detail. They’re very thorough. Once a file is open it stays open. So just remember not to talk to anybody about all this and stay out of trouble.’ I nodded. ‘Anybody want that last muffin?’ I made my way back through campus feeling completely alone in Princeton for the first time. I didn’t know where Steve lived, where his dorm was, the places he frequented or how I could set about finding out. It occurred to me that Steve must have been so frightened by the events of last night that from now on he would do his best to steer clear of me. It looked like I would have to do what had to be done all on my lonesome. I had seen my parents off from the Peacock Inn with a cheerful wave and in my pocket crinkled five hundred dollars in crisp new bills. ‘See, I can’t remember the number I have to punch in to get cash out of the wall,’ I had explained to my father. ‘It’s just clean gone from my head.’ He had disgorged with surprising ease. Perhaps we were rich … maybe it wouldn’t be so bad living in this America of Peacock Inns and wealthy fathers and dogs called Bella. There was something though … something in the air here that I didn’t like. Partly it was what they had said about Steve, partly that I had a sense, almost from the beginning, that something was missing here. It wasn’t just that rock and roll seemed to have passed the place by. Things were ‘neat’ and ‘peachy’, there were no ‘dudes’ and nothing was ‘cool’. There was a lot of ‘gee’ and ‘gosh’ and ‘darn’, which didn’t square with what I knew about the States from movies. There again, maybe that was just Ivy League talk. Princeton, I supposed, was hardly representative. Yet there was something else too … something wrong. I heard a motor behind me and stepped aside to let a lawn-tractor drive past. The elderly driver saluted his

317

thanks and stepped down to load a length of hose onto the trailer. ‘Hey there, Mikey!’ A hand fell on my shoulder. ‘Oh, hi,’ I said. It was Scott. Or possibly Todd. Or Ronnie even. One of the three. ‘How’s the limey?’ ‘Hey, I’m doing fine,’ I said. ‘Just fine. Everything’s getting much better. Back to my old American self.’ ‘Oh yeah? You’re still talking like the King of England.’ ‘Yeah, I know,’ I sighed. ‘But things are coming back. Doc Ballinger did say it would take a few days.’ ‘So we’re not gonna see you on the mound?’ ‘Excuse me? Oh, the mound. No, I think baseball is out for the moment.’ I shuddered at the prospect. ‘Bummer, I know, but there you go.’ ‘Darn it, Mikey. You picked one heck of a time … hey, watch it!’ Scott, or Todd, or whoever he was, leaped aside as the lawn-tractor chugged past us. It didn’t seem to me that there was any danger of his being hit but he was furious all the same. ‘Hey, you,’ he called out. The driver stopped the tractor and looked fearfully at Todd/Scott/Ronnie over his shoulder. ‘Me, sir?’ ‘Yes you, boy! Why the hell don’t you watch where you’re going?’ ‘I’m sorry, sir. I thought there was plenty room.’ ‘Well next time, you keep your negro eyes open, boy, you hear?’ ‘Yes, sir. I’m sorry, sir.’ I watched pulverised with shock. At once I knew what it was that had been missing from this place and felt foolish and guilty for not having noticed straight away. All the students I had seen were white. Every one of them. As white as shame. The tractor drove away. ‘Coons!’ Scott/Ronnie/Todd spat on the pathway. ‘Ain’t got no respect.’ ‘You’re full of it,’ I said. ‘Say what?’

318

‘Respect,’ I said. ‘You’re full of respect.’ ‘Oh sure,’ he nodded. ‘Sure, I have respect. So, Mikey, what you up to today?’ ‘Oh, I got work to catch up on,’ I said, my throat dry. ‘I’ll see you later, maybe.’ ‘Sure thing. So long, bud.’ ‘Oh, by the way,’ I called after him, knowing now that I needed Steve again, badly, whether Steve liked it or not. ‘I’ve clean forgot where Steve’s dorm is.’ ‘Burns? He’s in Dickinson.’ ‘Dickinson, right. Of course.’ ‘But you wanna watch out for him, Mikey. You know the rumors.’ Scott/Todd/Ronnie dropped his wrist and threw back his head into the pose of drooping lily. ‘Oh that’s a load of crap,’ I said. ‘He’s been seeing Jo-Beth. You know, the waitress at PJ’s?’ ‘That a fact? Hot dang, and she’s a peach. Pip-pip, old chap, old bean.’ It took a lot to make me dislike someone. But Ronnie/Todd/Scott, I decided, was a cunt through and through. Maybe, though. Maybe, I thought, as I followed three different sets of directions I had been given for Dickinson Hall, maybe I was the cunt. If America hadn’t been facing off against Europe all these years, maybe Todd/Ronnie/Scott would be a different person. I had done that to him. What was I saying? It was genes. It was genes, genes and nothing but genes. I mean, look at Leo’s father, Dietrich Bauer. A son of a bitch who goes to Auschwitz to help wipe out Jews in one world, and a son of a bitch who goes to Auschwitz to help wipe out Jews in another. And his son, a decent man in both worlds, but a little inclined to take his guilt very personally. Yet this was predetermination either way you sliced it. The will of history or the will of DNA. What happened to the will of man? Maybe I would find philosophy notes in

319

my rooms in Henry Hall that could help me through that particular maze. Meanwhile, here was Dickinson. A red-headed student hugging a pile of books was just emerging. ‘Burns? Just along the hall. 105. On the left there.’ ‘Woah, muchos gracias, dude.’ ‘Excuse me?’ ‘It’s nothing,’ I said, ‘just an expression of thanks from another era.’ ‘Oh. Sure. You’re welcome.’ Steve opened his door and rubbed sleep from his eyes. ‘Well?’ I said. ‘Aren’t you going to invite me in?’ ‘Christ,’ he said, letting me past him. ‘I was hoping it was all a dream.’ Steve’s walls were covered in posters. A portrait of Duke Ellington - so he survived the riptide of history, I thought with pleasure, that was something - and lots of pictures of girls. Big, busty, blonde, Pamela Anderson types with cold half-closed eyes arid enough blusher to paint the White House brick-red. ‘Mm,’ I said, inspecting them. “The lady doth protest too much, methinks.’ ‘Look, Mike,’ said Steve, tightening the belt of his dressing-gown, ‘let’s get one thing straight right now. Cut out all that stuff, okay? I’m in enough trouble as it is.’ ‘Trouble? What do you mean trouble?’ He shook his head. ‘What did they say to you last night?’ ‘Nothing,’ he shuffled to a coffee machine. ‘They didn’t say anything. They just dropped hints is all. They heard I had “psychological problems” and formed “strange friendships”. It was their idea of a friendly warning I guess.’ ‘I’m sorry,’ I said. ‘I’m really sorry. I didn’t mean to drag you into this mess. I had no idea … no idea America was like this.’ ‘Yeah, well it is. The world is. You want a coffee?’

320

‘Thanks. You know,’ I said, ‘where I come from there’s this thing called political correctness.’ ‘We got that here too.’ ‘No, but it means you get into trouble if you don’t give equal rights to women, disabled people, people from all ethnic backgrounds, black, Asian, Hispanic, American Indian, whatever, and of course gays. That is, lesbians and … you know, fruits, or whatever you call them here. If they so much as suspect you of being offensive, or bigoted or even faintly patronising to any of those groups you can get fired from your job, sued in court … you’re an outcast.’ ‘You’re putting me on, right?’ ‘No, no. Really. Homosexuals are called gays and they have parades and Gay Pride marches and Mardi Gras festivals and whole streets and quarters in the cities are given over to gay shops and gay bars and gay restaurants and gay banks and gay insurance brokers, gay everything. Only it’s a bit more complicated because they’ve started to use the word “queer” again, just as blacks call themselves “niggers” … it’s called “reclaiming”, something like that. In Hawaii gay people can even get married. There’s a right-wing backlash of course. The liberals think there’s still a lot of discrimination, the bible- thumpers think it’s all gone too far and that political correctness is an un-American contamination.’ ‘You’re an angel come down from heaven, right? You’re talking about paradise here.’ ‘Paradise, no.’ I considered crime and AIDS and race hatted and terrorism and road-rage and drive-by shootings and militias and fundamentalists and oil-spills and infant crack-addicts and the whole package. ‘I’m just talking about the world I know. It’s not paradise, believe me.’ ‘Look, Mikey, I’ll make you a coffee and then you’d better drink it and go. I got work to do. My life is here in this real America. The one that exists. I finish school, I find myself

321

a wife and a job and I live my life, okay? That’s how it works.’ ‘That’s what you want?’ ‘It’s not a question of what I want, Mike, that’s the way it is.’ ‘Are you saying everyone lives like that? Standard nuclear families?’ ‘Oh sure, there’s freaks and weirdos and liberals and communists and perverts in the ghettos living like pigs. You think I want that for myself?’ ‘Steve. Do you think you can trust me?’ He looked at me through eyes that were fighting back tears. ‘Trust you? Hell, I don’t even know you.’ ‘No, but you knew me before. When I was American and we were friends, I’m still the same person you knew then.’ ‘But I didn’t know you then, Mikey. I barely knew you at all. That is, you barely knew me at all.’ ‘What are you talking about? We were friends.’ Steve shook his head. ‘I lied about that. We were never friends. That night in the A & B, that was the first night I’d ever spent any time with you. I’d seen you around. I used to follow you all over campus without you ever knowing. I hate baseball, but every time you pitched, I was there, watching. That night, I had overheard you tell someone that you were going to the Clio to watch the debate, so I went along too. Sat behind you. And then you and Todd and Scott and your jock buddies got bored and headed for the A & B, so I followed. I sat close while you all got drunk and I found myself part of the group.’ The coffee-maker was hissing and spluttering so I went over and poured out two cups. The machine was a Krups, I noticed. Some things never changed. ‘Then you went weird,’ said Steve. ‘Your friends got all freaked out and I was left to see you to your room and check you were okay. When I came round next morning I think I knew something had happened to you. Because of

322

your eyes. There was something in your eyes that was different.’ He went over to a desk, pulled open a drawer and came out with a folder. He handed it over to me and sat down in an armchair with his coffee. ‘See, I know your face pretty well,’ he said as I looked through the photographs. ‘If anybody could see a difference in you, it would be me.’ There were hundreds of them. Me walking across campus on my own. Me laughing in the company of Todd, Scott and Ronnie. Me in baseball uniform, pitching, batting, punching the air, leaning forward hands on hips, glaring at the batter. Me in a winter coat, shoulders hunched against the snow. Me rowing on a lake. Me sunbathing. Me reading on the lawn. Me with my arm round a girl. Me kissing a girl. Me in extreme close up, looking straight ahead, just off camera, as if knowing that I was being watched. I closed the folder. ‘Wow,’ I said. ‘So, now you see.’ ‘Steve, I’m so sorry.’ ‘Sorry? What’s to be sorry?’ ‘You must have been so unhappy. So lonely.’ He looked down into his coffee. ‘Well, I’m going to have to get used to my own company, aren’t I? For the rest of my life. So what’s new?’ ‘If it’s any compensation,’ I said. ‘I think, from the little I’ve seen of them, that Scott and Todd and Ronnie are complete cunts.’ Steve smiled. ‘Ain’t that the truth?’ ‘And I cannot believe, I cannot believe from what I know of myself, that I can have been very happy here.’ ‘No? I used to think that about you. I used to think you were missing something. Of course I hoped that he trailed off. I sipped my coffee, my brain a mixture of sympathy, vanity and some serious planning.

323

‘What about England?’ Steve asked. ‘Were you happy there, in this other world of yours?’ ‘I don’t know. I think so. I suppose … I suppose like you, I was getting a bit pissed off at the prospect of getting a job, marrying, settling down, buying a house, all that. I had lost sight of the point.’ ‘And you see the point now?’ ‘The point is there is no point. That’s the point.’ ‘Great. The philosophy major speaks.’ I sat myself down on the desk. ‘What did you expect? I’m the guy that got you into this mess, you expect me to have answers?’ ‘So life just carries on, does it? What about your world of Mardi Gras festivals and equal rights and Hawaiian marriages? I knock the heels of my ruby slippers together twice, wish hard and find myself there, do I? Or maybe I find a mystical spot where I can stick my hand through a wall and just step into this parallel universe of yours? Or maybe you tell me that it is my destiny to fight for a brave new world of brotherly love and that I am to become a rebel leader, the founder of a new America who will lead his children to the promised land. And then you disappear in a puff of smoke. Is that the deal?’ ‘No, Steve,’ I said, ‘that’s not the deal. If you listen to me I’ll tell you what the deal is.’ I talked. He listened. The deal was struck. Movie History The Sting EXT. DICKINSON HALL, PRINCETON FADE IN: CAMPUS - AFTERNOON We TILT up from ground level and take in the exterior of Dickinson Hall, moving in to a window on the first floor. . CUT TO: INT. STEVE’S ROOM, DICKINSON HALL - AFTERNOON STEVE is holding a small laminated card and gives careful instructions to MICHAEL, who is listening attentively.

324

STEVE So that’s the library card. You remember how we took out books last time? It’s the same deal. This here’s your student number. Memorise it, okay? Every student knows their number, might look kinda suspicious if you had to keep referring to the card. MICHAEL nods . STEVE hands him a shopping bag. STEVE (CONT’D) And you’ re sure about how the carts work? Just like I showed you. It’s real simple. MICHAEL Just like you showed me. STEVE And here’ s the campus map. You know most of the landmarks now. This room. Your room in Henry. Okay . . . (getting serious) I know this might sound crazy, but from now on whenever we meet, we don’t talk about this, except in PJ’s or the A & B. Those guys we met last night MICHAEL (shocked) You think they might put bugs in our rooms? STEVE (even more shocked) Hey, this may not be like the ideal nation state but we’re not Nazi Europe. We don’t do chemical warfare here. MICHAEL No, not those kind of bugs! Listening bugs! You know, wire taps. STEVE Oh, right. Yeah. I’m saying it’s a possibility, that’s all. MICHAEL Big Brother is alive and well. STEVE Say what? MICHAEL Big Brother. As in ‘Big Brother is watching you’ . It’s from a novel by George Orwell that’s never been written. STEVE The George Orwell? STEVE has gone to his desk and started to gather up papers and a camera. MICHAEL You heard of him?

325

STEVE You kidding? Every kid in America has to plow through Darkness Falls. MICHAEL Darkness Falls? When did he write that? STEVE (packing the camera into a blue nylon bag) Oh, late thirties, I guess. It’s like the masterpiece of the free world. Orwell was shot in the ‘39 British Rebellion. I got a copy somewhere, you can borrow it. MICHAEL Thanks. And I can tell you about 1984 and Animal Farm. They’ll blow your mind. STEVE (pleased with the phrase) Blow my mind? That’ s a helluvan expression. STEVE feeds a length of cable up from the nylon bag, through his shirt and down his sleeve. It ends in a small device which nestles in his left hand. We see on this device tiny control switches and a row of little red lights. MICHAEL watches this procedure in surprise, completely unable to understand it. STEVE nods towards the bag. STEVE Take a look at that bag. MICHAEL stoops down. ANOTHER ANGLE: From the POV of the camera inside the bag we see MICHAEL’S face loom towards us in CLOSE-UP, peering curiously. BACK onto STEVE’S hand, deftly manipulating the control device: the red light glows. BACK onto the CLOSE-UP of MICHAEL’S enquiring face, which now ZOOMS WIDER into a MID-SHOT. The contrast alters and then Suddenly, it FREEZES. BACK onto STEVE who grins in triumph. STEVE There’s another one for my Michael Young collection. MICHAEL is impressed with the set-up. MICHAEL You sneaky bastard . . .

326

STEVE Yeah, well that’s one of the advantages of being a sad, lonely fairy, I guess. You get to learn how to be a spy. He winks cheerfully as he picks up the bag and holds open the door for MICHAEL to leave first. We hold on STEVE’S still smiling face as MICHAEL passes by. STEVE’s eyes follow MICHAEL out of the room and then the smile disappears. It is replaced by a look of hunger and desolation. FADE TO: EXT. FIRESTONE LIBRARY, PRINCETON -AFTERNOON MUSIC An establishing shot of the Firestone Library, craning down from the huge tower. CUT TO: INT. FIRESTONE LIBRARY, PRINCETON -AFTERNOON Inside the library, MICHAEL is hauling a pile of books along a corridor. He comes to a door which says: - FLASHING ROOM MICHAEL enters. One other person is there, an ELDERLY ACADEMIC, hunched over a machine, one of a dozen such devices in the room. MICHAEL (winningly) Hi! The ACADEMIC scowls over his shoulder and then turns back to his work. MICHAEL shrugs and goes over to the machine furthest from the grouchy ACADEMIC. CUT TO: EXT. QUANTUM MECHANICS BUILDING, PRINCETON - SAME TIME MUSIC continues. STEVE is sitting, leaning against a great chestnut tree, blue nylon bag on the ground beside him. On STEVE’S lap is a sketch pad onto which we MOVE. A fairly decent drawing of the bronze statue of ‘Science Triumphant’ which

327

stands in front of the Quantum Mechanics building. STEVE gives the impression of drawing: looking up and down between the statue and the pad on his lap . Series of SHOTS of: - STEVE’S FACE, as he apparently looks in the direction of the statue . . . STEVE’S POV: ACADEMICS and STUDENTS entering and leaving the building . . . STEVE’S LEFT THUMB: manipulating the little control device . . . THE BLUE NYLON BAG, and the small hole in its side, through which we can just make out the reflective surface of a lens. CUT TO: INT. FIRESTONE LIBRARY, FLASHING ROOM -SAME TIME MUSIC continues: MICHAEL stands in front of the flashing machine and looks at it, finding it slightly forbidding. It is like a scanner, but the styling and design of the switching gear are very alien to him. He opens the first book of his pile. We see its title. Gloder: The Early Days by Charles B Flood. A bright orange sticker on the top right of the jacket reads, ‘FLASHABLE TEXT’. MICHAEL opens the book and flips through it to about the middle of the book, speed-reading blocks of text. He turns the book over and examines the spine, he looks down it from the top and feels with his thumb. He is puzzled that he can’t feel anything. Next, he places the book, SPINE DOWNWARDS, into a little channel on the machine, where it is firmly gripped. There is a gentle beep from the machine as the book fits into its slot. A display on the front panel asks him to ‘Enter Student Number’. MICHAEL does so. The display requests: ‘Welcome, Michael D Young’. MICHAEL smiles.

328

The display changes to: ‘# of pages? 1=ALL 2=RANGE’. MICHAEL taps in ‘ 2 ‘ . The display reads ‘Range?’ MICHAEL taps in ‘1-140′ . The display reads ‘Insert Cart’. MICHAEL takes a small black cart from his bag and slips it into a port below the main display panel. There is a small hum from the machine and the display says ‘Flashing, please wait’ . MICHAEL looks at the next books in his pile: amongst them we see Gloder: the Nobleman by A L Parlange, Prince Rudolf? by Mouton and Grover and Gloder’s Kampfparolen: A New Translation with Notes, by A C Spearman. They all have the same bright orange sticker on them saying ‘FLASHABLE TEXT’. A beep comes from the machine, the cart is ejected. MICHAEL looks at the display which reads: ‘Flashing complete: remove cart’. MICHAEL does so. The display reads: ‘Flashdata will delete 06/29/96′. MICHAEL scribbles Gloder: The Early Days on the cart’s label and readies the next book for flashing. CUT TO: EXT. QUANTUM MECHANICS BUILDING - SAME TIME MUSIC continues: STEVE is still sitting serenely under the chestnut tree, apparently drawing. We see the nylon bag. We see STEVE’S left hand. Close on the lens in the bag. The MUSIC builds to a climax. Now, a montage of SHOTS that go from movement to STILLS of people entering and leaving the building: - A PAIR OF LAUGHING WOMEN, ARMS AROUND EACH OTHER’S SHOULDERS. A NERDY-LOOKING STUDENT, STRAIGHTENING HIS SPECTACLES. A COOL OLDER MAN IN SUNGLASSES . AN ECCENTRICALLY SHOCK-HAIRED OLD

329

PROFESSOR. FOUR YOUNG STUDENTS, EATING ICE-CREAMS. AN OLDER MAN, IN PROFILE, TALKING TO A WOMAN. ANOTHER NERDY STUDENT, LOOKING LIKE A TIMID RABBIT SUDDENLY - A huge human THUMB comes into shot and pulls the last PHOTO away to reveal behind it the one before: the OLDER MAN, IN PROFILE, TALKING TO A WOMAN. MICHAEL (OOV) (whispering excitedly) That’s him! CUT TO: INT. PJ’S PANCAKES, NASSAU STREET - EVENING MICHAEL and STEVE are sitting at their table by the window in PJ’s. MICHAEL has the pile of photographs in front of him. He pulls one free. MICHAEL (CONT’D) The beard’s gone, thank God -but it’s him all right. STEVE takes the photos and replaces them in a folder. He looks around. The place is not very full. The nearest table to them contains a couple of students, male and female, holding hands and obviously paying no attention. It seems safe enough. STEVE Good. Tomorrow I’ll find out where he lives . And how are you getting on in the library? MICHAEL All done. It’s a piece of piss. STEVE Excuse me? MICHAEL Easy. It’s ridiculously easy. STEVE Sure. But the next problem is, I’ve gotta show you how to use the Pads . So. we’ 11 go to your room and I’ll take you through it. But remember . . . we don’t say anything about all this. JO-BETH the waitress comes forward. STEVE Hiya, Jo-Beth.

330

JO-BETH Don’t you xHiya Jo-Beth’ me, you prick. STEVE (puzzled) I ‘m sorry? JO-BETH So, we’re seeing each other, are we? Well, it’s the first I ever did hear of it. Some kinda sick joke? MICHAEL (gulping) Oh-oh . STEVE What are you talking about? JO-BETH Just where the heckfire do you get off, Steve Burns, telling Ronnie Cain that you and I are seeing each other? What? Oh, no STEVE MICHAEL . that’s my fault see JO-BETH and STEVE turn to him, surprised. MICHAEL (CONT’D) (in some confusion) See, I told Ronnie how Steve admired you, Jo-Beth. You know, how he was plucking up courage to ask you out one of these days . I guess he got hold of the wrong end of the stick JO-BETH (a blushing smile) Yeah? Well why didn’t you tell me, Steve? (hitting him playfully with a menu) Honestly, you guys . . . you’re supposed to be smart, but you don’t know nothing about women . . . STEVE makes an effort to grin. His blush only seems to confirm his devotion. JO-BETH Sure I’ll go out with you, Steve. You’re cute. MICHAEL (nudging Steve cheerfully) There! See! What I tell you? So . Um .

331

JO-BETH STEVE JO-BETH There’s a movie on at the Prytania . . . CLOSE ON STEVE’S confused expression. CUT TO: EXT. PRINCETON CAMPUS - NIGHT MICHAEL and STEVE are heading for HENRY HALL. STEVE Jesus Christ, Mikey . . . MICHAEL I’m sorry. It’s just that that guy, Ronnie. He was being obnoxious, you know. Dropping hints to me about you in the most pathetic, jocky way . . . so I . . . so I . . . STEVE So you told him I was seeing Jo-Beth. MICHAEL Well, it shut the prick up at least . . . STEVE . What the hell am I gonna do? I’m supposed to go see a movie with her Friday night. MICHAEL Come on, don’t be such a wimp. You know how to watch a movie. STEVE Yeah, but what if she puts her arm round me? What if we’re supposed to go on somewhere and . . . MICHAEL Putting her arm round isn’t going to make you throw up is it? Come on! She’s a nice girl. STEVE You don’t understand, do you? You just don’t understand. It wouldn’t be fair to her. It wouldn’t be right. MICHAEL Okay, okay. Tell you what. I’ll go. I’ll tell her you’re sick. I’ll bring along a note from you and I’ll go in your place. STEVE (miserably) Right. Then the pair of you go off to your room and screw, right?

332

MICHAEL I don’t know. Maybe. Jesus, I’m sorry! I thought I was doing you a favour. STEVE Yeah, well next time you wanna do me a favor, you ask, okay? MICHAEL It’s only a week or so. A few more days even, if Leo is doing what I guess he’s doing. Here we are. He looks up at the ivy-clad mock Gothic of Henry Hall. CUT TO: INT. MICHAEL’S ROOM, HENRY HALL - NIGHT MICHAEL and STEVE are sitting in front of a computer. STEVE is pressing the screen. They both talk in rather false voices, for the benefit of any listening devices that may be in the room. STEVE Gee, Mikey. It’s really strange that you still can’t remember how to use the system. MICHAEL . I know. It’s all kind of coming back slowly. But I’m real grateful to you for helping me out. They grin at each other like naughty schoolboys at the stupid formality of their speech. STEVE No problem. Let’s have a look at your work files, shall we? The screen has some permanent icons around the edge: the central area is made up of pages. STEVE presses an icon and a number of buff coloured folders appear, with titles on their tabs . MICHAEL So this is, what, like on the Internet then? STEVE Excuse me? MICHAEL This computer is connected to other computers in a network? STEVE

333

Right. This is not a computer, Mikey. This is a Pad. Um MICHAEL Pad? STEVE Personal Access Device. The computers are way across the other side of campus. The Pad is how you get at your stuff. MICHAEL Oh yes. Pad. I get you. Of course. But how do I type into it? STEVE Why would you wanna do that? MICHAEL Well, don’t I do my work on it? You know, word- processing, letters, assignments, stuff like that? STEVE You just talk to it. MICHAEL Oh, that’s right. I talk into it. It knows my voice? STEVE Sure it knows your voice. MICHAEL Then why isn’t it typing in what we’re saying? STEVE laughs and slaps MICHAEL playfully on the shoulder. STEVE You touch the talk glyph, dummy. We see the screen now. There is an icon device at the top left of the screen, this is the speech icon, known as a Talk Glyph. STEVE (CONT’D) Okay, when you touch the talk glyph, it brightens, see? And everything you say is either a command or text to be typed in. Then you touch it again, to dull it and you can talk without it taking down everything you say. Now I can see you’ve got work stuff here. You’ve got notes on Hegel, right? So press the talk glyph and say ‘Fetch Hegel notes ‘ , or ‘fetch my notes on Hegel’ , anything like that. If there’s more than one of something, it’ll put up the options and you touch the one you want, it’s real simple. MICHAEL (worried)

334

But what about this weird voice I’m talking in at the moment? This English accent? STEVE Shouldn’t be a problem. MICHAEL leans forward and touches the talk glyph, which brightens. MICHAEL (talking to the screen: very loud and clear) Fetch my notes on Hegel. Nothing happens. STEVE touches the talk . glyph to turn it off. STEVE Woah, woah. You don’t have to shout. Just talk in your normal voice. MICHAEL touches the talk glyph. It brightens again. MICHAEL (casually) Fetch my notes on Hegel. A kind of window opens to one side and a representation of a folder instantly appears, very high resolution, with ‘HEGEL NOTES’ written on the front and a list all down one side of different titles. ‘Biography’, ‘Dialectics’, ‘Hegel and Nietzsche’ and so on. MICHAEL Wow, that is so cool’. STEVE Okay, now touch, this . . . MICHAEL touches the screen where it says ‘Dialectics’ . A page of very high-resolution, clear, anti-aliased text opens elegantly. It is a list of notes on Hegel and dialectics. STEVE Okay, so if you need to change anything, you just touch it. Then you touch the talk glyph and say what you want to say. You can’t miss. MICHAEL looks at a whole area of text which reads: TEXT The first deduction gains the ideas of Nothing and Becoming from the idea of Being. We begin with the idea of Being, since there can be no idea more general than this. Applying to all there is, Being seems to have great fullness of meaning. And yet, because it makes no distinctions, the idea of Being reveals its emptiness, turning into its opposite, Nothing. But, then, the passage of Nothing into Being is what we

335

mean by Becoming. In this manner we have derived the first three of Hegel’s 272 categories. MICHAEL These are my notes? STEVE Sure. MICHAEL Wow. I’m a genius! MICHAEL leans forward and touches the first sentence: ‘The first deduction gains the ideas of Nothing and Becoming from the idea of Being. ‘ Next he touches the talk glyph and speaks. MICHAEL This is just about the most coolest thing I’ve ever seen. Instantly, the text now reads: ‘This is just about the most coolest thing I’ve ever seen.’ MICHAEL Wow! Wicked. Totally wicked. The text now reads: ‘This is just about the coolest thing I’ve ever seen. Wow! Wicked, totally wicked.’ STEVE laughs and touches the screen. STEVE You forgot to turn off the talk glyph. MICHAEL ¦ How does it know to punctuate? STEVE It doesn’t always get it right. But it knows about inflection and pauses and stuff like that, (recalling that they might be being overheard) Are you sure you don’ t remember any of this? MICHAEL Oh. Yeah. Sure. It’s coming back. It’s all coming back. I’d just forgotten how cool it is. How neat. You know, real neat. But what’s this . . . He points to a panel that says ‘Double superlative?’

STEVE It’s questioning the phrase ‘most coolest’ on account of it’s a double superlative. MICHAEL (shaking his head in wonder) Wow! STEVE

336

Sure. MICHAEL Okay. So. Suppose I’d gotten a book from the library and downloaded it onto one of those . . . STEVE Flashed it to a cart, you mean? MICHAEL Yeah. Flashed it to a cart. STEVE quietly picks up the carts from MICHAEL’S bag. They have the titles scribbled on in MICHAEL’S hand, Gloder: The Early Years and so on. STEVE Well what you do is insert the cart . . . He pushes the cart into the cart-port below the screen. STEVE (CONT’D) A glyph appears on screen. Indeed, we see on the screen that this is so. A representative icon in the shape of a cart. STEVE (CONT’D) . . . you touch the glyph and . . . sim-salabim! The glyph zooms open and pages of the book Gloder: The Early Years appear, perfectly reproduced, on the screen. STEVE (CONT’D) To go through the pages, you touch the arrows here, see? Or use the talk glyph to go to any ,, page you want. MICHAEL And I can use this text, move it about, incorporate it in my own notes? STEVE Sure. The data on the cart will delete itself after two weeks. And any data you use in an assignment is automatically footnoted, copyrighted and placed in a bibliography at the end. To stop cheating, you know, copyright violation, that kind of thing? MICHAEL And where is all my work? I mean where actually, physically does it exist? STEVE

337

Hell, I don’t know. Somewhere in the computing lab, I guess. MICHAEL But suppose I was writing letters home, personal stuff, diaries, that kind of thing? STEVE If you touch the privacy glyph here, no one but you can read it. MICHAEL Great. So now I can get on with my work. I can write essays and assignments and . . . how do I print them out? STEVE You just flash them to a cart and take them to a print room somewhere. There’s one in every faculty building, every dorm building. Nothing to it. MICHAEL This is so cool. I always knew Windows 95 was complete shit, but . . . STEVE Excuse me? MICHAEL Nothing, nothing. How long has all this been around? That is, I seem to have forgotten . . . STEVE This? This is ancient. This is a copy of a seventies European system. But you should see what’ s on the way. There’ s a German defector over here called Krause, Kai Krause. The stuff he’s coming up with would just send you spinning. I saw a demo at the computer lab one time. (looking at the screen) Now, if you ever need to send a message, here’s what you do. STEVE touches a message glyph at the side of the screen. The pages of text up on screen shrink neatly into themselves and a new screen is revealed behind. An array of beautifully designed glyphs. STEVE Touch the talk glyph and say your own name. MICHAEL (touching the talk glyph) Michael Young.

338

On screen two Michael Youngs appear. STEVE touches the talk glyph to turn it off. STEVE Oh-oh, you’ve got a double. You’re this one, ‘Young, Michael D’ . The other guy’s just plain Young, Michael, no initial. ‘Sides, he’s a freshman. See? That’s his classyear next to his name. STEVE touches the name YOUNG, MICHAEL D. A small panel appears. MICHAEL That’s me! 3 03, Henry Hall! What are all these icons? STEVE Glyphs, they’re glyphs, Mikey. You touch this one to open an info pane, this one to make a voice-call, this one to page, this one to leave a message on someone else’s Pad. MICHAEL Like an e-mail? Electronic mail, that kind of thing? STEVE Flashmail. You can either flash a voice message or a text message. This is how you place a phonecall. MICHAEL leans forward and touches the phone glyph. Instantly, a telephone on the desk next to the screen rings. MICHAEL Jesus! STEVE Congratulations, you just called yourself. You can call me or anyone on campus this way. Live talk person-toperson, or, if you touch this glyph, leave a text message. MICHAEL picks up the phone and examines it. It is not quite like any phone he has ever seen. It is cordless, but not like most mobile phones. More of a mix between a phone and a pager. STEVE touches the phone glyph again and the ringing stops. STEVE That’s your mobile compad. Now, I’ll show you how to leave flashmail.

339

STEVE touches the flashmail glyph. A window opens on the screen. STEVE Leave yourself a message. STEVE puts down the compad and presses the talk glyph. He turns to MICHAEL and indicates for him to speak. MICHAEL (to the terminal) Hiya, Mikey, how you doing? Good to see you the other night. Feel like going over to see the Yankee game next week? Catchalater, love Mikey. STEVE presses the talk glyph again to deactivate it. Then he presses the flashmail glyph and the window disappears. The computer gives a friendly, purring beep and a window flashes on screen. ‘Flashmail waiting . . . ‘ MICHAEL touches the flashmail glyph and a window opens: it says 1FLASHMAIL WAITING FOR MICHAEL YOUNG, FROM MICHAEL YOUNG.’ Michael’s own voice comes out perfectly from the speakers at the side of the screen. SPEAKERS Hiya, Mikey, how you doing? Good to see you the other night. Feel like going over to see the Yankee game next week? Catchalater, love Mikey. MICHAEL (awe-struck) Ho t z i gge ty-dang! STEVE (shrugging) There you go. Lesson over. They continue to talk for the benefit of any possible hidden listening devices. MICHAEL (standing up and stretching) Gosh, Steve. I don’t know how to thank you. STEVE (also standing) Hey, don’t thank me. It means you haven’t got any excuse now not to get back to work. They are facing each other. STEVE is looking into MICHAEL’S eyes. MICHAEL (embarrassed) So

340

STEVE (also slightly awkward) Right. Well, I guess I’d better be . MICHAEL, surprising himself, silently pulls STEVE towards him. He puts a hand on his cheek. STEVE stares at MICHAEL, unable to move. The feeling of MICHAEL’S hand on his cheek is like an electric shock. MICHAEL (whispering, hardly audible) I mean it, really . . . thanks. He leans forward and kisses STEVE on the lips . STEVE puts his arms round MICHAEL’S neck and holds him tightly. MICHAEL suddenly ends the kiss and pulls away. He goes to the door, opens it and says, in a clear voice. MICHAEL Goodnight then, Steve. STEVE (disappointed, hurt) Right . . . sure. G’night. MICHAEL immediately closes the door loudly, before STEVE has had a chance to leave. MICHAEL puts a finger to his lips. STEVE suddenly understands. He smiles in radiant relief, pure love and joy in his eyes . They embrace. EXT. QUANTUM MECHANICS BUILDING AFTERNOON FADE TO: LATE STEVE is by the chestnut tree again, bicycle leaning up beside it. He is reading. He looks up towards the entrance to the building. Nothing. He yawns and looks up at the sky, dreamily contented. He stretches a hand for his nylon bag and takes out a compad, like the one we saw in MICHAEL’S room: a phone and pager combined. STEVE smiles to himself as he taps its keys. CUT TO: INT . MICHAEL ‘ S ROOMS - SAME TIME MICHAEL is at the Pad, touching glyphs on the screen with great rapidity and assurance now. Panes appear and reappear on-screen, zooming and cutting and mixing. We catch sight of large sections of

341

text being highlighted and moved around. The name ‘Gloder’ appears a great deal. Suddenly, on the screen, a panel appears accompanied by a PURRING BEEP: lFlashmail waiting . . . ‘ Surprised: Michael touches the screen. A window opens: ‘Flashmail from S Burns, Dickinson Hall 105.’ MICHAEL reads the text. MESSAGE You are so cool . XXX MICHAEL smiles to himself and closes the window. He touches some more parts of the screen. CUT TO: EXT. QUANTUM MECHANICS BUILDING - SAME TIME STEVE stands suddenly and looks towards the entrance of the Quantum Physics Building. We see, from his POV, LEO, we’ll still call him that, emerging from the building, briefcase in hand. STEVE scrambles to his bike, throws the book into the nylon bag and hoists the bag over his shoulder. ANOTHER ANGLE: LEO is walking towards the car-park. In the background we see STEVE wheeling casually around in circles behind him. LEO goes to a car, a small dark-blue convertible, and drops his briefcase onto the passenger seat. CUT TO: LEO driving out of the car-park and STEVE pedalling furiously behind him. CUT TO: STEVE, crouched low over the handlebars, concentrating on the car ahead. Suddenly, we hear a BEEP-BEEP-BEEP come from the nylon bag over his shoulder. CUT TO: EXT. NASSAU STREET, PRINCETON - SAME TIME

342

LEO is in west-bound traffic, waiting at a stop light, tapping the steering-wheel. Two cars behind him, casually leaning against a parking meter, is STEVE. With one eye keeping a watch on LEO’s car, STEVE digs out his compad and presses a button. We see the readout. READOUT You are one bitching, slamming, waycool dude yourself . . . XXX STEVE gives a grin, wide as a tree-frog’s. Then he looks up quickly. The lights have turned green and the traffic is starting to move. The compad still in his hand, STEVE hares after the traffic. Fortunately it is Princeton’s rush-hour.

There’s enough of a line of traffic on the road to allow STEVE to keep LEO in sight. LEO proceeds west along Nassau and then peels off left. STEVE follows. CUT TO: INT. MICHAEL’S ROOM, HENRY HALL - SAME TIME MICHAEL is still busy working. A message comes up: ‘Cart full! ‘ MICHAEL ejects the cart and replaces it with another. While he is labelling the full cart, another PURRING BEEP comes from the terminal. ‘Flashmail waiting!’ MICHAEL touches the screen and reads the text: MESSAGE BINGO - QUARRY LOCATED . . . XXX PS: IS ‘BITCHING’ GOOD? MICHAEL smiles and touches the screen. CUT TO: EXT. MERCER STREET, PRINCETON - SAME TIME STEVE has leaned his bike against a tree and is standing opposite a house. 343

We see the blue convertible parked there and the number on the door, 22. There is a beeping sound. STEVE gets out his communicator. READOUT Good work! I’ve got printing to do. A & B, 7 : 00 pm? PS: ‘Bitching’ is as good as it gets. XXX STEVE presses a button on the compad and climbs happily back onto his bike. CUT TO: INT. HENRY HALL, PRINCETON - SOME TIME LATER MICHAEL emerges from his room clutching a bag. He closes the door and walks along the corridor. He jumps down the stairs, five at a time, until he reaches the lobby. He goes to a door marked ‘Printing Room’ and enters . INT. PRINTING ROOM, HENRY HALL CUT TO: SAME TIME MICHAEL, alone in the room, approaches a large printer and presses a button on the front panel. The message comes up: ‘Student number?’ MICHAEL punches in his number. A message says: ‘Hello, Michael D Young. Please insert cart . . . ‘ MICHAEL gets out some carts from his bag, goes through them and inserts the first. A new message appears: ‘# of copies?’ MICHAEL punches ‘1′ . Another message: ‘Collation method? 1=LOOSE 2=PUNCHED 3=LAMINATE-B0UND’. MICHAEL thinks about this for a moment. He looks around and sees, on a shelf above the printer, a small tray of green string document tags. He presses l 2′ on the control panel. The message reads: “Now printing. Please wait. ‘ There is a humming noise from the machine and the sound of paper being flicked and sucked and fed through rollers. MICHAEL goes to a chair and gets out a book from his bag. We see the title: Darkness Falls by George Orwell. He starts to read.

344

MUSIC FADE TO: INT. HENRY HALL, PRINT ROOM -TIME LAPSE SEQUENCE A series of shots:- The printer’s control panel ejects a cart and the display comes up: ‘Next cart’. MICHAEL jumps up from his reading, finds the next cart and places it in the machine. He returns to the chair. The control panel ejects the next cart. MICHAEL replaces the next: the picture FADES to the next cart ejecting. Double and triple exposed images of MICHAEL standing up, sitting down, replacing carts, carts being ejected. The machine beeps. CLOSE on the display. END MUSIC: The display reads: ‘224 Pages. You have been billed $25.00. Thank you, Michael D Young.’ MICHAEL stands looking stupidly at the machine. Where is the printout? He walks round to the back. There is a moulded plastic handle at the rear of the printer. MICHAEL lifts the handle cautiously. Nestling neatly, squared, a punched hole lined up exactly at the top left of each page, is a tall stack of printed paper. The top page reads : - From Bayreuth to Munich The Roots of Power by Michael D Young Below it is a turn-of-the-century sepia portrait of the very young Rudolf Gloder. MICHAEL looks at the manuscript lovingly and breathes quietly to himself . . . MICHAEL Das Meisterwerk! CUT TO: EXT. ALCHEMIST AND BARRISTER, PRINCETON -LATER MICHAEL and STEVE are sipping beers in the corner of the courtyard at the table nearest the street. The tables





Unknown




345

either side of them are empty. MICHAEL checks the other tables. STEVE Hey, don’t be so paranoid. It makes you look suspicious. MICHAEL 22 Mercer Street. You’re sure? STEVE Sure I ‘m sure . I’ll show you on the map. Real easy to find. How the printing go? MICHAEL pulls up his bag from the floor and opens the top. STEVE peeps inside. STEVE (CONT’D) Jesus, how long is that? MICHAEL It repeats and repeats. He’ll only see the first couple of dozen pages. I’ll make sure of that. STEVE You’re the boss. They sip beer for a while. Suddenly MICHAEL starts. MICHAEL Hey! It’s Friday today. Jo-Beth! STEVE nods glumly. STEVE I know. I’ ve been thinking about that and it’s okay. MICHAEL ‘You’ve been thinking about that and it’s okay?’ What does that mean? STEVE I’ll go. It’s no problem. MICHAEL You’ll go on the date? STEVE Uh-huh. I’ll go. MICHAEL But if she . . . you know . . . gets up close and personal? STEVE I’ll handle it. MICHAEL thinks about this for a while. MICHAEL So now it’s my turn to be jealous. STEVE is touched. STEVE Come on. You just said that to please me. MICHAEL Oh yeah?

346

STEVE doesn’t know whether to believe him or not. STEVE Another beer . I need one . For courage. MICHAEL Hey, she’s not gonna bite you, you know. You might even enjoy it. She’s a nice girl. There’s worse things. STEVE (standing) Right. CUT TO: EXT. NASSAU STREET - NIGHT STEVE is walking slowly along the sidewalk, now wearing a jacket and tie. He reaches PJ’s Pancake House. He looks through the window. He can’t see much. He swallows twice, straightens his tie and enters. CUT TO: INT. PJ’S PANCAKE HOUSE - NIGHT JO-BETH is hanging up her waitress uniform. She turns when she hears the door. STEVE (shyly) Hi there, Jo-Beth. JO-BETH (embarrassed) Oh. Steve. Hi! Listen, um . . . I tried to get in touch with you . . . but . STEVE Is there a problem? A MAN gets up from a seat and turns round. It’s RONNIE. RONNIE I am that problem . . . STEVE (staring in surprise) Ronnie? RONNIE (shrugging cockily) Sorry, pal. But, like they r say. All’s fair in love and war, you know what I mean? STEVE Oh . . . you mean you and . . . ? Oh, I get it. JO-BETH Steve I’m really sorry. Really I am. It’s just that Ronnie and

I. We . . . STEVE 347

(putting up a hand) Hey! No, no. Really. It’s fine. I understand. Totally. I totally understand. Truly. Believe me. RONNIE comes up to him grinning broadly. RONNIE Hey. Put it there, Burns. Taken like a man. STEVE shakes RONNIE’S hand. Serious guy stuff. STEVE Sure. No problem. I’ll . . . I’ll see you guys around. Have a good time now, you hear? Enjoy the movie or … you know . . . whatever . . . STEVE backs out, trying desperately to look at the same time bitterly disappointed and generous in defeat, whereas inside he is feeling exultant and relieved. CUT TO: INT. MICHAEL’S ROOM, BEDROOM, HENRY HALL -NIGHT MICHAEL is lying in bed, reading Darkness Falls. He hears the sound of his door opening and sits up, alert. The door to the bedroom opens and STEVE stands there. MICHAEL looks surprised to see him and looks at his watch. It is only ten o’clock. MICHAEL mouths the words, ‘ How was the movie?’ STEVE shakes his head slowly and starts to kick off his shoes. He mouths the word ‘Ronnie’. MICHAEL switches on the radio next to his bed and turns up the volume. Country and Western music fills the room. MICHAEL (under the music) Did you say ‘Ronnie’? STEVE He got in there real fast, I’ll say that for him. MICHAEL So you’ve been chucked? Jilted. Passed over. I never would have thought Jo-Beth had such poor taste. STEVE smiles at the compliment, sits on the bed and ruffles MICHAEL’S hair. STEVE (just loving the word) You are so cool . . .

348

He reaches over and switches off the radio. CUT TO: EXT. MERCER STREET, PRINCETON - EARLY MORNING We PULL BACK from Number 22, where LEO’S blue car is still parked. We LOOK down the street, beautiful in the early light. Birdsong, light dappling on the sidewalk, an idyllic summer morning. MICHAEL is leaning against a tree on his bike. He has his bag in his hands and is checking the pages of the manuscript inside. The first twenty or so pages are loose, the rest are firmly tagged. He hears a noise and looks up the street to number 22 . A door opens. LEO emerges, a briefcase under his arm. MICHAEL stiffens, arranges the bag over his shoulder and crouches over his handlebars, ready to go. LEO starts the engine of his car and switches on the radio. MUSIC floods out. Beethoven’s Eroica. Tumpty-tumming to himself, LEO shoots a cursory glance into the driver’s mirror and backs slowly out of the driveway. CUT TO: ANOTHER ANGLE: Crouching low, tight to the tree-line, MICHAEL pedalling furiously towards us. ANOTHER ANGLE: The trunk of the car slowly emerging from the driveway. ANOTHER ANGLE: LEO humming lustily to Beethoven. ANOTHER ANGLE: from WIDER and HIGHER, MICHAEL’S bike hurtling towards the emerging rear-end of the car. ANOTHER ANGLE: LEO singing very lustily now: he accelerates the car backwards and THUMP! CRASH! MICHAEL’S front wheel CRASHES into the blue metal of LEO’s car. PAPERS fly in the air.

349

LEO slams on the brakes, aghast. Papers swirl about his head and flutter into the car itself. LEO cuts the engine, the MUSIC dies. LEO (leaping from the car) Oh my God. My God! MICHAEL lies artistically on the road, the bulk of his manuscript still safely held in the bag. LEO comes round and stoops anxiously. His accent is thickly Germanic, not a hint of American in it. LEO Are you all right? Oh, please God you are all right! I didn’t see you. I never saw you. Forgive me, forgive me. MICHAEL (getting to his feet) Woah - that’s okay, sir. No bones broken. Whew! He dusts himself down. LEO You are sure? You are not hurt? MICHAEL Guess I shoulda looked where I was going. It’s my fault. I was on the wrong side of the street . . . oh Jesus, my assignment! MICHAEL looks in horror at the pieces of paper scattered all around and inside the car. LEO I get them for you. I get them, no problem. Please, stay where you are. MICHAEL looks into his bag-. MICHAEL They’re mostly still here. Sheesh! I thought I was really screwed then. LEO leaps about collecting papers from inside the car and around the curb. LEO Here. They are fine. They are He breaks off. He has seen the title page. MICHAEL looks at him innocently. MICHAEL They all there, sir? I guess I need . . . (he checks the bag) . . . pages 1 through 24.

350

LEO looks through the pages, counting. MICHAEL studies his face carefully. LEO (curious but watchful) All there. You are history student? MICHAEL Me? Oh, no, sir. Philosophy. LEO Philosophy? But, the title of your work, it . . . MICHAEL Oh, right! You see, I’m doing a paper on evil. LEO Evil? A paper on evil? MICHAEL Hm-hm. For my ethics course. I’ve been researching the early life of Rudolf Gloder. Every detail of his childhood. It’s not well covered. You’d be surprised what I’ve found out. Stuff about his mother, his birth. Everything. I have a theory that . . . oh, I’m sorry, sir. I’m boring you . LEO No, no. Not at all. Boring me? No. MICHAEL holds out his hand. MICHAEL If I can have them, sir? LEO (distracted) Excuse me? MICHAEL The pages? LEO Oh yes. Of course. Here. Forgive me. (handing over the pages which MICHAEL tucks into the bag) It is just that it seems so wrong. A boy like you, here . . . in this country. In America. Sir? MICHAEL LEO That you should worry your head with such a subject. What can you know of evil? MICHAEL Well, I guess we all know something about evil, sir. I mean, you only have to open a newspaper, am I right? Crime. Child murder. Corruption.

351

And in history. The Moscow and Leningrad bombs . The JFS . The LEO Excuse me? Tchay effess? What is this tchayeffess? MICHAEL That’s J - F - S, sir. The Jewish Free State? LEO Ah, of course. JFS. I understand. What do you know of this JFS? MICHAEL (shrugging) Well, no more ‘an anyone else I guess. There’s rumors. But you know . . . LEO (nodding) Yes . Always there are rumors. MICHAEL Well, I’m sorry about the accident, sir . . . guess I’d better be moving along . MICHAEL looks ruefully at the front wheel of his bike which is buckled, tyre flat, spokes dented. LEO Going? Good heavens, what are you talking? You must come in and clean up. I will have your bicycle to be repaired. MICHAEL Oh, that’s not necessary, sir LEO No, no. I insist. Please. And afterwards I can give you a . . . what is the word? Wherever you need to go. MICHAEL A lift. LEO (surprised) A lift? That is the English usage, no? Oops MICHAEL (hastily) We say lift sometimes. Or ride. Ah yes, LEO ‘ride’ . That is what I wanted to say. Much more American. I give you a ride into town, pardner. First you clean up, please.

352

MICHAEL picks the bike up and leans it against the hedge. They walk together, MICHAEL limping bravely, up along the pathway, towards the front door of the house. ANOTHER ANGLE: LEO and MICHAEL, from a VERY LONG LENS, which wavers slightly, enter the house and the door closes. ANOTHER ANGLE: STEVE, perched up a tree, is looking through his camera, which has a big telephoto-lens attached. He puts it down and sits in the bough of the tree, swinging his leg beneath him. Everything seems to be going to plan. Something catches his attention. He sits up again and puts the camera to his eye. ANOTHER ANGLE: FROM STEVE’S CAMERA’S POV: We look up the line of cars parked along Mercer Street. We pass along, stop suddenly and return down the line of cars to a maroon sedan, facing us. The driver’s side- window of the sedan is open and an elbow is visible, jutting out. The arm straightens right out and flicks ash from a cigarette onto the street. Too much light is reflecting off the windshield to make out the face of the man behind the wheel. ANOTHER ANGLE: STEVE scrabbles in his blue nylon bag and nearly falls out the tree in his haste. He steadies himself and fishes from the bag a small, silver box which he opens. He pulls out a glass ring which he holds up to the light and looks through. He polishes the ring with a- silk duster from inside the box. He closes the box and returns it to his bag and, one arm hooked around a branch for safety, he carefully attaches this glass ring to the end of the telephoto-lens. Now he lifts the camera to his eye once more. ANOTHER ANGLE: FROM STEVE’S CAMERA’S POV: Again we move along the line of cars. This time, the polarising filter allows us to

353

see through the glare of reflections on the windshields. We stop at the maroon sedan. STEVE (00V) (under his breath) Holy shit . . . The man behind the wheel is familiar to STEVE. It is HUBBARD. CUT BACK TO: STEVE dropping the camera, which dangles from its strap against his chest.-He opens the nylon bag again and frantically scrabbles for his compad. CUT TO: INT. LEO’S HOUSE, MERCER STREET - SAME TIME MICHAEL is in the kitchen, one leg up on the table. LEO turns back from the sink, a piece of cotton lint soaked in water in his hand. He dabs at MICHAEL’S grazed knee. MICHAEL winces slightly. LEO (anxiously) There is pain? MICHAEL No, no. It’s fine. Just stings a little, that’s all. I feel like the boy in The Go-Be tween. LEO Excuse me? MICHAEL It’s a movie. A kid cuts his knee sliding down a hay-rick and Alan Bates dabs at it just like this. LEO This movie I never saw. MICHAEL No. No, I guess not. Excuse me, I should tell you my name. I’m Michael Young. LEO How do you do, Michael Young. My name is Franklin. Chester Franklin. MICHAEL (stifling a laugh) Really? Well, how do you do Mr Franklin. He holds out a hand. LEO (shaking hands) You find this name amusing? MICHAEL (hastily) No! Please, I’m sorry. It’s just . . . well, you know

354

LEO goes over to a waste-basket and drops in the cotton lint. LEO You are right. It is not, of course, my real name. MICHAEL Hey, that’s okay. None of my business, Mr Franklin. Or is that Doctor Franklin? LEO Professor Franklin. But please, call me Chester. MICHAEL You got it, Chester. People call me Mikey. LEO So tell me … er … Mikey. I find this paper you are writing most . . . LEO’s observations are interrupted by a loud beep-beepbeep. MICHAEL Uh-oh, my compad. Do you mind? LEO Please . MICHAEL’S bag is next to him on the kitchen table. With his back to LEO he pulls out his compad and looks at the read-out. He closes his eyes briefly for a second, mind racing hard. He turns to LEO. MICHAEL (loudly) Gee, it’s real kind of you to clean me up like this, Chester. As he speaks, he goes over to a yellow legal pad and picks up a pen next to it. He starts to write in frantic haste, the pen racing along. MICHAEL (CONT’D) (loudly: while writing) I’m such a klutz, you know? Third time I’ve come off my bike this week. LEO I’m sure it was not your fault MICHAEL (talking over him) My friends tell me I should get a tricycle. You know, three wheels? Maybe it would be safer. Nice place you have here, Chester. Quiet little street. I live in a dorm. You a baseball fan, Chester?

355

LEO (rather puzzled by all this) Well, I … MICHAEL Baseball is my life. I eat baseball, drink baseball, sleep baseball. You should try and catch a game. It’s what the angels play in heaven. I guess you like soccer? We don’t really play much soccer here. American Football, you ever seen that? Basketball maybe. I’m not really tall enough for basketball. You have to be real tall to reach the basket, you know? Me I guess I’m average height at most, always wanted to be taller. Still, you can’t always get what you want, am I right? During these last witterings, MICHAEL has torn off the top sheet from the pad and handed it to LEO. He holds it in front of his eyes, an urgent expression on his face. Bewildered, LEO fishes for his reading-glasses and reads . From his POV we read the note too. It is written in big block capitals. NOTE Trust me. We are being watched. I know you are Axel Bauer. I am a friend. I can help you. I know about your father and Kremer and Brunau and Auschwitz . You must trust me . I can help . LEO’s eyes widen with fear. He stares at MICHAEL dumbfounded. MICHAEL holds a finger over his lips. . MICHAEL (loudly) Hey! Is that the time? Jeez, I’d better be going. Did you say you might give me a ride? LEO just stands there, trembling slightly. MICHAEL nods his head vigorously. LEO jerks out of his trance. LEO . ¦ Hey? A ride? Of course. Certainly. MICHAEL

356

(casual, loud voice) Guess we should be able to get that old bike of mine in back, if you don’t mind a bit of mud on the seats? LEO shakes his head and realises he is supposed to answer for the benefit of any listening devices. LEO (even louder) NO! NO PROBLEM. THE MUD IS FINE. MICHAEL winces slightly and shakes his head smilingly. He takes the thoroughly bemused and shaken LEO by the shoulder and leads him through to the hallway. He has a sudden thought. He rushes back into the kitchen, to where the yellow legal pad is. He pulls off the next top sheet, and then the next. What the hell. He pulls off thirty at once and takes them all with him. MICHAEL (rejoining LEO in the hall) Okay then, let’s hit the road. Probably not the best metaphor, but you know what I mean, huh? LEO (still too loud”) YES. I KNOW WHAT YOU MEAN. HIT THE ROAD! HA-HA! MOST AMUSING. They go to the front door. EXT. MERCER STREET - SAME TIME CUT TO: WIDE on LEO and MICHAEL dumping the bicycle onto the back seat and getting into the front of the car. ANOTHER ANGLE: STEVE watches from his tree. The car backs out of the drive. LEO has to slam the brakes on again as another bicycle comes shooting by. CUT TO: INTERIOR OF CAR. LEO My God. Not again! MICHAEL (looking over his shoulder) It’s okay. You’re clear now. CUT TO:

357

STEVE’S CAMERA’S POV. LEO’S blue convertible backs out, straightens up and heads away. We MOVE UP to the maroon sedan, a cigarette butt is thrown from the window, the car pulls out and follows LEO’s blue convertible. CUT TO: STEVE, lowering the camera, a worried look on his face. EXT. PRINCETON STREETS - MORNING LEO’s car emerges onto Nassau. INT . LEO’ S CAR - SAME TIME CUT TO: CUT TO: LEO, looking scared as hell, is driving badly. MICHAEL If you could just drive me round to University Place, that would be fine. LEO Please to tell me what . . . MICHAEL stops him by putting a hand on his arm. LEO looks across. MICHAEL indicates the car instrument panel and points to his ears. LEO gets the message. Even the car might be bugged. MICHAEL has an idea. He turns the radio on, loud. MUSIC: The Prelude to Act III of Lohengrin roars out, trumpets blaring. MICHAEL (shouting above the music) I’ m sorry Axel. But you can’ t be too careful. LEO Who are you? How do you know my name? My God! I know! It’s you! You are the one! MICHAEL frowns in puzzlement. MICHAEL What do you mean? LEO (CONT’D) You are that student on the train, yes? They tell me I was talking in my sleep. They give me drugs to stop it happening again. You are that student that heard me talk on the train. MICHAEL

358

Oh. Of course. Look, I’m sorry about that, Axel. That’s just what I told them. It’s not true. I was never on any train with you. I’m sure you don’t talk in your sleep. I had to make up some story to explain how I knew all about you, you see. It was all I could come up with at the time. LEO (terrified) You are English1. Your accent is English! Who are you working for? I stop the car right now. The car swerves . Brakes squeal. Horns sound from behind. MICHAEL (desperately straightening the wheel) No! Keep driving for God’s sake! We’re almost certainly being followed. LEO Followed? Followed? By whom? MICHAEL You know Hubbard and Brown? LEO I know them, yes. MICHAEL Hubbard has been watching your house. LEO But Hubbard.is my friend! You. You are working for Europe. You are a Nazi ! MICHAEL (struggling to be heard over the music) No! Please believe me. I am not a Nazi. Listen, I know things. Things that you need to know. If I’m right, you will be trying to develop a machine. LEO Machine? What machine? MICHAEL To generate an artificial quantum singularity. To create a window on past time. You are obsessed by your father’s guilt. The factory he built at Auschwitz to mass-produce Brunau Water. Maybe you want to send something back in time. Something to destroy the factory perhaps. Something to stop Rudolf Gloder from being born. But I know what you really have to do. I know the answer.

359

(looking around) Just pull up here, outside the market. The car has turned into University Place. The Prelude to Act III of Lohengrin, meanwhile, has developed into the Bridal March that follows. LEO stops the car with a squeal of brakes outside the Wawa Minimart. Next to it is a cycle shop called CYCLORAMA. MICHAEL (CONT’D) I know the secret of Brunau Water. I know how it got there in the first place. I know who put it in the water supply of Brunau over a hundred years ago. Believe me. I know. LEO stares at him. VOICE Hey! LEO almost jumps out of his skin. A PASSERBY looks into the car and shouts over the music. PASSER-BY Congratulations on the wedding, guys. But how’s about turning it down, huh? MICHAEL waves him away with a hand. MICHAEL (shouting in LEO’s ear) The Lake. West Windsor. Tonight. Eight o’clock. Please! I am a friend. Believe me. Whatever you do make sure you’re not being followed. A friend of mine will watch your back. He will be wearing red. The PASSER-BY puts his hand in the car and wrenches down the volume. PASSER-BY Assholes! The PASSER-BY straightens up and then, true to name and nature, passes on by. MICHAEL (calling after him) Sorry, man. (to LEO: feigned normality) So, thanks for the ride, Chester. Real nice to meet you. Hope it all goes well. You really should go see a ball-game one of these days .

360

MICHAEL gets out of the car, hauls his bike from the back seat and turns towards Cyclorama. LEO is sitting, staring sightlessly forward. MICHAEL (calling after him) So long then, Chester. I expect you need to be moving along now, right? LEO turns to look at MICHAEL once more, doubt and anxiety in his eyes. MICHAEL mouths the words v TRUST ME’ , salutes him farewell and turns into the shop. In the background, we see the front of the MAROON SEDAN which is parked around the corner. It does not follow LEO’s car. It stays where it is as MICHAEL enters the shop. FADE OUT: Making History Rats I wished it were winter. In winter it got bitterly cold in Princeton, Steve had said. Maybe as much as twenty below. There would have been snow and ice everywhere and the bicycle ride to Windsor would have been difficult, miserable and dangerous. But at least it would have been dark. Blessedly, wonderfully dark. As I pedalled along, I would have been able to see any headlights behind me and that luxury would have made up for a lot of physical discomfort. There again, I thought, as I turned off the road and hid myself and my bicycle behind a tree for the fourth time, maybe Hubbard and Brown had all kinds of night-vision gear available to them, so perhaps it made no difference whether it was dark or light. I waited behind the tree for fifteen minutes before pushing the bike back out into the highway and resuming the ride south. West Windsor lay only a mile or so from Princeton, but Steve and I had agreed that I should allow four hours for the journey. Just to be sure.

361

I leaned round a corner and at last saw what I was looking for, a turning left towards the lake. Somewhere on another road, I prayed, Leo was undertaking the same kind of cautious journey, with Steve a safe distance behind him. Or maybe Leo was sitting around that shiny maple table, under the framed Gettysburg Address, talking to Hubbard and Brown about his strange morning with the mysterious Englishman who shared Michael D Young’s fingerprints, but knew things Michael D Young shouldn’t. If that was the case, then that meant they must have got to Steve too, because for the last three hours my compad had been silent. No alarms, no changes of plan. I realised now, far too late, that it would have been much more sensible to have arranged instead for Steve to bleep me every hour on the hour whatever was happening, just to let me know that everything was cool. I cursed myself for not thinking of this. The silence of the compad didn’t really tell me anything at all. I debated calling him just to set my mind at rest. I decided against it; if you make a plan, you should stick to it. Maybe he was in a place where a sudden bleeping noise would draw attention to him at exactly the most disastrous time. I didn’t understand the technology of these compads enough to know whether or not the bleepers could be turned off, or whether their calls were traceable. Maybe, I realised, that’s why Steve hadn’t suggested regular communication between us in the first place, because our positions could be calculated by someone listening in. For all I knew, Hubbard and Brown could track us in a scanning van the moment our compads were in use. I wondered if Leo would be any good at this kind of thing. He had managed to escape from his conference in Venice and make his way to the American consulate. That argued some kind of gumption. I had remembered to warn him about Steve. ‘A friend of mine will watch your back. He will be wearing red.’ Once

362

Leo got to the lake, Steve would make himself known to him and lead him to me. That was the plan. But suppose Hubbard or one of his men, by some ghastly coincidence, was also wearing red? Suppose, suppose, suppose. All kind of things might happen. It was no use my worrying about them. All I could do was follow my part of the plan and hope for the best. The sweat on me was attracting the midges and mosquitoes that hung around in gangs on the lakeside like street-corner thugs. I was off the bike now, and wheeling it along a narrow path that skirted the lake on its north side. Across the water I heard the traffic on Highway One, a mile to the south, and in the center of the lake, a rowing eight skimmed by at an astonishing speed, the barking of the cox coming to me clear over the unruffled surface. A sudden movement in the bushes on my left stopped me dead in my tracks. I stood where I was, my heart beginning to thrash about in my chest like a trapped bird. Suddenly, a rat, big as an otter, its fur damply streaked, jumped onto the path in front of me almost colliding with my brand new Cyclorama front wheel. I let out an instant involuntary shout of horror and fear and the rat, shocked out of its wits, skidded and scrambled like a rally-car out of control, obviously a great deal more scared than me. It rolled over twice, regained its footing and dived back into the undergrowth, leaves, twigs and stones sticking to its back like totems on a Mexican bride’s wedding-dress. ‘Rats,’ I said in an Indiana Jones voice. ‘I hate rats.’ I saw and heard more of them as I hurried on towards the rendezvous point. Maybe they weren’t rats, though. Maybe they were groundhogs or gophers. Not that I was exactly sure what those were. I only knew about them from those Bill Murray movies, Groundhog Day and Caddyshack. Was a groundhog the same as a gopher? There was yet another

363

kind of American rodent too, wasn’t there? A coypu. Maybe they were coypus. Or possums even. Whatever they were, I hated them to buggery and made as much noise as possible as I worked my way along, just to alert them to my presence. After twenty more minutes, I came at last to a place where the path divided. To the right it snaked round, following the outline of the lake, to the left it led into the land of rats, gophers, coypus, possums and groundhogs. Slapping the back of my neck like a true jungle explorer, I took the left-hand path. Two hundred yards in, after battling through some overhanging greenery, a clearing came into view. I saw a tall silver birch and next to it, the huge, lichen-covered tree-stump that Steve had told me about. On this stump I sat, smoking busily to keep the no-seeums and mozzies at bay. There was a repulsive stench about this place, something far worse than the usual rotten marshy pong characteristic of land near water. I began to feel my gorge rise. For gorge read lunch. The cigarette smoke was of no help at all, either in deterring the insects or in masking the foul reek. I stood up, almost unable to breathe. As I moved away, things improved. The smell was localised it seemed. Pulling out a handkerchief and holding it over my mouth and nose, I edged back towards the stump where a funnel of gnats still swirled. I peeped cautiously over the stump and instantly vomited. In the long grass a pair of dead rats nestled, clinging to each other with tightly closed eyes like sleeping children, their fur alive with little white squirming maggots, no bigger than commas. The soup of vomit now beside them, I supposed, as I wiped my mouth, would be another treat for the malevolent insect-life which seemed to own this part of the woods.

364

I leaned against a tree which was as far away from the stump as I could find, and contemplated the foulness of nature. Hot red lumps had begun to break out on my neck and hands. They were not the bite marks of insects, but more like some kind of allergic reaction. As a child I had suffered from mild hay fever. I thought I had outgrown it, but out here the rich density of lakeside life, of pollen and lichen and rats and bugs and grasses and seeds and spores seemed to give off a toxic cloud of allergens at which my skin and lungs revolted. I felt my chest tighten into a wheeze and my eyes, I knew, were puffing up like marshmallows. I lit another cigarette. I couldn’t inhale because of the asthma, but there was a comfort in the synthetic sterility of its sleek, urban poison. I wished I had brought along a rug. Not wool or cotton or anything natural or organic, but a nasty, tacky nylon or polyester mat. It would have been like a raft of civilisation over this crawling Sargasso. Jumpy, I was getting decidedly jumpy. I looked at my watch. Nearly time, very nearly time. In five minutes or so I would know whether Leo trusted me. I would know whether - OH JESUS, MY LEGS ARE ON FIRE! What had I done? Set light to the fucking tree with my fucking cigarette? I slapped at my legs, screaming in agony. There were no flames and no clouds of smoke. By the time the tears had cleared from my eyes enough to enable me to see, it was plain to me that it was not fire that scorched my legs. Just ants. Hundreds of the bastards. Thousands. From the knee down it looked like I was wearing long ant socks of an especially tight weave. I tried frantically to wipe them off, yelling and kicking and bucking all the while like a maddened bull.

365

The touch of a human hand on my shoulder as I danced away from the tree, nearly, unseated my reason entirely. Letting out a huge scream, I thrashed with my fist backwards over my shoulder. It met nothing but air, which, as it turned out, was just as well. ‘Mikey, what’s the matter?’ Merely the sound of Steve’s soft, easy voice did something to calm me down. ‘Ants,’ I screeched, turning and falling into his arms. ‘Ants, rats, mosquitoes. Everything. Oh, Steve, why the fuck did you choose this place?’ He pushed me gently away from him. Over his shoulder I saw Leo’s frightened face peering at me in alarm. ‘Fire ants,’ said Steve, trying to keep the amusement out of his voice. Tm sorry, guess I should have warned you to look out for them.’ ‘Fire ants?’ I said. ‘Are they poisonous?’ ‘They just sting a little. Come on, sit down. I’ll get the rest off you.’ ‘A little! They sting a little?’ Steve brushed the rest of the ants from my shins. ‘They’re real smart little critters actually. What happens is they crawl up your leg but they don’t do anything at first. They wait for a signal from the leader and then they all bite at once, in one united attack. See, if the first one bit you as soon as he had gotten there, you would feel him and brush the rest off before the others had a chance to get a feast too. Real smart. You gotta hand it to evolution. I brought along some stuff. Looks like you had an encounter with some poison ivy too.’ ‘Poison ivy?’ ‘Yeah,’ he started to spread a cold gel all over my legs, neck and arms. ‘Nasty, huh?’ ‘I’m sorry,’ I said to Leo, as he edged nervously forwards, blinking like an owl. ‘You must think I’m hysterical. It’s just that I’m not used to the American countryside. I had a

366

vision of Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm. I had no idea it would more like the dark heart of the Amazonian rainforest. My mistake.’ Leo looked about him uneasily as if he too, wondered what horrors lay within these woods. Steve’s next remark was not helpful. ‘Let’s just hope there aren’t any lime ticks hereabouts.’ ‘Lime ticks?’ I said, a new horror dawning. ‘What the fuck are lime ticks?’ ‘You don’t wanna know, buddy. Trust me on this.’ ‘Oh Jesus,’ I moaned. Steve screwed the top onto the tube of ointment and slapped me cheerfully on the thigh like a no-nonsense nurse. ‘Okay. That feel better?’ The gel had soothed me slightly, but I still felt as if I was on fire. ‘A little,’ I said. There was no use complaining. Too much to do. I got painfully to my feet. ‘The main thing is, you’re here.’ ‘Sure we’re here,’ said Steve. ‘And you weren’t followed?’ Leo shook his head forcefully. ‘Not followed,’ he said. ‘It went great,’ chirruped Steve, who in his bright red T- shirt and shorts looked like Mephistopheles’ junior apprentice on a seaside holiday. ‘Now perhaps,’ said Leo. ‘You will be kind enough to tell me what is the meaning of all this? Who you are. Why you arrange this meeting. How it comes that you know so much of me?’ ‘I will explain everything to you, sir,’ I said. ‘I promise. But first I have to know something from you. About your work. I have to ask you to confirm a guess.’ There was one detail of my plan that I had not worked out. I think I had been hoping that something would occur to Leo. No doubt it would have done so. It was with great pleasure, though, as darkness fell and we were preparing to leave each other and go our separate ways back to

367

Princeton, that I let out a shout as inspiration hit me with a thrilling kiss. ‘Oh shit, not more fire ants?’ said Steve. ‘No,’ I said. ‘Not ants. I’ve had an idea. I don’t suppose either of you has a container of some kind?’ ‘Like this?’ Steve held up his blue nylon bag. ‘Well, I don’t want to ruin it. Something smaller would do. More like a shopping bag. A plastic bag maybe. Or a box.’ ‘I have many bags and boxes at home,’ said Leo. ‘That’s no good I’m afraid. I need something right here and now.’ ‘For why?’ ‘Hey!’ said Steve, who had been hunting through his nylon bag. ‘How ’bout this?’ He was holding up a silver-surfaced case about half the size of a shoe box. ‘That’s perfect,’ I said. ‘What the hell is it?’ ‘I keep my filters and lenses in it.’ He undipped the lid and showed me. ‘Mm,’ I said doubtfully. ‘The space is all divided up.’ ‘The partitions just slide out,’ said Steve. ‘See?’ Steve scooped out the lenses and filters and then pulled out the dividing slots. ‘Brilliant. Simply brilliant. Better than a bag. With any luck it might be almost airtight. Now, Steve,’ I said, placing a hand on his shoulder. ‘Do you think you have a strong stomach?’ He wrinkled his brow in puzzlement. ‘I guess so,’* he said. ‘Pretty strong. Why?’ ‘Well,’ I said. ‘Behind that tree stump there, you will find two dead rats. But I warn you, they are crawling with maggots and they stink to heaven.’ Five hours later Steve and I met outside the statue of Science Triumphant and waited for Leo.

‘He is coming, isn’t he?’ I said. ‘I mean, he will come?’ ‘He said he would come. He’ll come,’ said Steve.

368

‘Why are you so calm? How come you’re so bloody calm? I’m not calm. I’m jumping like a Mexican bean. But you … you’ve been so in control all day. How come? How come you’re calm? I’m not calm. I’m not even slightly calm.’ ‘You could’ve fooled me,’ grinned Steve. ‘I mean, this might be a disaster. It might start all over again. I might wake up in the middle of an Iraqi punishment cell or a Siberian gulag. Jesus, I might be destined to do this for the rest of my life, like the Flying Dutchman or Scott Bakula in Quantum Leap. Without even the dubious advantage of Dean Stockwell.’ 1 don’t have the faintest idea what you’re talking about,’ said Steve, ‘but just have faith buddy. The world you wake up in can’t be worse than this.’ ‘Oh no?’ I said. ‘I’m not so sure that this world is really so much worse than mine.’ ‘From what you’ve told me, it’s a lot worse.’ ‘Yeah, but I haven’t told you about Microsoft and Rupert Murdoch and fundamentalists and infant crack addicts with Uzis. I haven’t told you about lottery scratchcards and mad cow disease and Larry King Live. Maybe we should just forget this whole thing.’ ‘You’ve just got the jitters, is all. You told me about political correctness and gay quarters in towns and rock and roll and Clinton Eastwood movies and kids not having to call their dads “sir” but saying “motherfucker” and “no way, dude” and chilling off in Ecstasy dance clubs. I want some of that. I want to be cool.’ ‘That’s chilling out, actually, not chilling off.’ ‘Whatever. I want to wear weird clothes and grow my hair long without being fined by the college or having a fight with my parents. If you want to do that here, you live in a ghetto and the police round you up and harassle you.’ ‘And that’s hassle, in fact. Hassle or harass. Not harassle. And I’ve a feeling I may have given you a false impression of my world. I mean it’s not all one long party you know. Ecstasy is illegal and people don’t use the word

369

motherfucker in front of their parents. I mean, not white middle-class people anyway.’ ‘Yeah? Well, give me the chance to find out, okay? Give me a chance to use these words and live this life, okay? It’s you that denied me the right in the first place.’ ‘Mm,’ I said, doubtfully. ‘I just wonder if…’ ‘Besides,’ he interrupted. ‘That’s just the present we’re talking about. You’re forgetting history. You think you can just leave that?’ ‘All right, all right!’ I said. ‘I know. I’m being hysterical. But what if something goes wrong?’ ‘Something has already gone wrong, hasn’t it? We’re gonna put it right.’ ‘But this time I might wake up and never remember.’ ‘So what’s the difference? You’ll never know.’ ‘But what about you? Suppose you find yourself, with your old consciousness in another country with the wrong accent, knowing nothing about it, like I did? People will think you’re nuts. Christ, suppose it’s a country where you don’t even speak the language?’ ‘That’s a chance I’m gonna have to take.’ ‘No,’ I said, grabbing his arm. ‘Christ, I’m glad I thought of this. What you’re going to have to do is not be in the room. Nowhere near the event when it takes place. That way, what happened to me can’t happen to you.’ ‘Hell, Mikey. Don’t say that! We’re in this together.’ ‘No way, Steve. You have to-’ ‘Why are you making so much noise!’ Leo appeared out of the darkness, hissing angrily. ‘You want everyone in Princeton should know we are here?’ ‘Mikey is saying I can’t come in with you,’ said Steve, whining like a child denied a treat. ‘Tell him I can.’ I explained my reasoning to Leo. He thought about it carefully before speaking. ‘I think Mikey is right,’ he said at last. ‘If you were caught up in the event horizon and retained this identity it could make your life very difficult afterwards. We cannot take such a risk.’

370

‘But-’ ‘No. I think it is better you help us by leaving alone,’ said Leo with decision. ‘You have been much service to us already.’ It took ten minutes of argument and wheedling to convince Steve. ‘I’m really sorry,’ I said, as he sulkily handed me the silvered lens case. ‘But you do see ‘Yeah, yeah,’ he said. ‘I see.’ I held out my hand. ‘Cheer up,’ I said. ‘After all, this may never work. For all we know, in two hours time we’ll discover that it can never work in this world. I may be stuck here for ever.’ He took my outstretched hand. ‘Maybe,’ he said. ‘But more likely I’ll never see you again and ‘And what?’ ‘You’ve been kind to me, Mikey. I know that’s all it was. Just kindness. But you’ve made me happier in the last couple of days than I ever was before. In my whole life. Maybe happier than I ever could be, in any world.’ ‘What do you mean by saying that’s all it was? It wasn’t kindness. I like you, Steve. You must know that.’ ‘Yeah. You like me. But back in England you’ll have a girlfriend.’ ‘I doubt it. I only ever had one and she left me. But back here, when everything is as it should be, you’ll have a boyfriend. Dozens of them. Hundreds. As many as you can handle. More than you can handle. A cute dude like you. You’ll be beating them off… as it were.’ ‘But they won’t be you, will they?’ ‘Gentlemen, please!’ said Leo, who had been listening to this with mounting impatience. ‘It is almost light already. We may be seen.’ Steve hugged me tightly and disappeared into the shadows. ‘He’s very fond of me,’ I explained to Leo. ‘My glasses I need only for reading,’ he replied, somewhat elliptically. ‘You have the rats?’

371

‘Yup,’ I said, showing him the box. As he input his security code into the panel by the entrance door, I cast my mind back to the night outside the New Cavendish building, when I had raced round on a bike to meet him in the Cambridge starlight, my pocket full of little orange pills. He led me silently to the elevators whose whooping hum seemed devastatingly loud in the dead silence. Down a maze of third-floor corridors I followed him until we arrived at a door in front of which he stopped. ‘How the hell did you come up with Chester Franklin?’ I whispered, indicating the name-plate on the door. ‘That was Hubbard’s idea,’ he answered, as the door clicked open. It was dark as a cellar inside. I stood, not daring to move, listening to him fiddling with blinds. At last he flicked a light-switch and I could look around. He pointed to a stool, like a sea-lion trainer. ‘Sit,’ he said. ‘Please say nothing to lose me my concentration.’ I sat watching him in obedient silence. There was a Tim, or a machine not unlike the Tim I had known. But its casing was white, tinged with duck-egg blue. That may have been a trick of the overhead lights, however, whose glow seemed to cast a faint blue over everything. There was no mouse on this machine, but instead a joystick stuck up from the side like a lollipop. The screen was larger and there was no vestige of keyboard. Instead of Centronix cabling and yards of spaghetti, clear plastic pipes emerged from the rear, like the tubes on an intravenous drip. A sudden horrible thought struck me and made my mouth go dry. Suppose the Nazis had abolished the Greenwich meridian? Leo had not asked me about the coordinates of Brunau when we had talked out there in the woods.

372

His first idea four years ago, as I had guessed, knowing my Leo, had been to do something to destroy his father’s factory in Auschwitz. Then he had seen that this might not be enough, and he had considered the possibility of assassinating Rudolf Gloder. He did not know how this could be done but, although his heart had been set against murder, he had toyed with the idea of sending a bomb to an early Nazi congress. He decided such a project was too full of imponderables, so he considered next the possibility of sending Brunau Water to Bayreuth to stop Gloder’s birth. He believed it would be a fitting irony. His difficulty was that Brunau Water no longer existed. At least, it might exist somewhere, but he did not know where and dared not ask. Then he heard, through an academic colleague in Cambridge, that there was work being done in Princeton, America, which pointed towards the possibility of contraceptive drugs. Such work was forbidden in Europe on the grounds of ‘ethics’, a hypocritical irony the macabre humour of which Leo had never been able to share with anyone. So, logical and single-minded as ever, Leo had decided to defect to the United States. He was the same Leo all right. The same overwhelming burden of inherited guilt, the same fanatical belief that he could and must atone for his father’s guilt. He had found it difficult however, once installed in Princeton, to pursue his private quest. The government authorities here believed him to be working on a quantum weapon that would give America the chance to gain a final decisive advantage over Europe. There was no justification for his asking a lot of questions about contraceptives under such circumstances. He had expected to find academic freedom in the United States, freedom of a kind denied European scientists. He had been greatly mistaken. If anything, the security and secrecy here was more intense than in Cambridge.

373

Then I had shown up. Now he and I were preparing to make the world a better place by ensuring that Adolf Hitler lived and prospered. The idea of the rats had made him laugh. Steve had laughed too. It was so foolish. ‘But it makes sense!’ I had protested. ‘What would you do if you pumped up water one morning and it was full of maggots and bits of dead animal and smelt like a sewer? You wouldn’t drink it, that’s for sure. The whole cistern would be pumped out and disinfected. It stands to reason.’ Neither of them had been able to come up with a better suggestion, so into Steve’s lens box the rats had gone, their suppurating bodies almost falling to pieces as a retching Steve scooped them up between two pieces of cardboard. Leo had taken the cardboard from Steve and finished the job. His was the strongest stomach of all. I watched him working now: his strong blue eyes darting over his creation, his long fingers operating switches, his whole restless body almost trembling with the intense concentration of his actions. He seemed to sense my gaze for he looked up at me. ‘It goes well,’ he whispered. ‘About Brunau,’ I said. ‘You’ll need the coordinates. I’m worried that ‘You think I don’t know them?’ ‘Forty-seven degrees, thirteen minutes, twenty-eight seconds north, ten degrees, fifty-two minutes, thirty-one minutes east.’ He nodded. ‘Your memory is good. See. We are looking there now.’ ‘I remember something else,’ I said. ‘You once told me that in this life you are either a rat or a mouse. Rats do good or evil by changing things and mice do good or evil by doing nothing.’ His eyes flicked over to the silvered lens-case. ‘Most appropriate,’ he said. ‘Now, if you are ready. It is time.’

374

The tubes that ran from the back of the machine gleamed with shooting pulses of red light. The screen swirled and glowed with colour. ‘That’s it?’ I asked. ‘Brunau?’ ‘1st of June. Four a.m.’ ‘The colors are different from last time.’ ‘They are meaningless,’ he replied in that faintly contemptuous tone of voice scientists use with dumb laymen. ‘The representation can be any color you choose to assign.’ ‘What are the red lights in the tubes there?’ Data,’ he said, a note of worry and surprise in his voice. ‘It is data. This is not how it was before?’ ‘Pretty much the same,’ I said, reassuring him. ‘The wires coming out of the back were different, that’s all.’ ‘How did they look?’ ‘Well, they weren’t transparent, that’s all. The data ran through copper wires.’ ‘Copper wires?’ he sounded amazed. ‘Like old-fashioned telephones? But that is primitive.’ ‘It worked didn’t it?’ I said, springing rather illogically to the defense of my own world. He looked back at the screen. ‘Can it be so simple?’ he asked. ‘I just press this and my father’s factory at Auschwitz never happened?’ His finger was stroking a small black button below the screen. I had not told Leo that in our previous world his father had also been at Auschwitz. I thought it might unhinge him to know that, no matter what he did to history, his father seemed to be destined to supervise the bestial destruction of Jews. He turned from the screen and from his pocket he took two white masks. He attached one to his face, hooking the strings over his ears, and handed the other to me. I put it on, and great waves of menthol filled my nose and lungs, making my eyes run. I saw that he was weeping too. He blinked back his tears and pointed at the lens- case.

375

I undipped the lid of the box, opened it, swallowed hard and looked inside. A huge, flapping, trail-legged insect flew out and hit me in the eye. I dropped the lid and shouted in terror. ‘Quiet!’ Leo hissed. ‘It is not a wolf.’ He handed me two sheets of card with a frown. I lifted the lid again, keeping my head at an angle, ready to duck any more flying creatures. There didn’t seem to be many flying creatures in there. A few fleas maybe, but nothing as substantial as that first horrible bug. No, most of the creatures left in this Pandora’s box were of the slithery kind. They had been busy over the past few hours: breeding and busy. The whole box heaved and shuddered with life. It was all too gloopy and broken up to be lifted between two bits of card. ‘I think …’ I said, my voice sounding deep’and muffled under the mask, ‘I think it’s best if I just empty it, don’t you?’ He looked into the box, nodded silently and pointed me towards what looked like a tall church font. The top part, the bowl or basin, was where I supposed the bits of rotting rat should go. From the underside, pulsing data tubes led to the back of the machine. Leo signalled for me to get it over with and I held my breath and emptied the contents of the box into the basin. Even through a menthol-soaked mask I could tell how great the stench was. Averting my eyes, I banged the edge of the box against the lip of the bowl and heard the sludging slither of rotting flesh slap out onto the plastic of the font basin, like gruel being doled into bowls by a workhouse matron. I took a quick look at the box and saw that there was more stuck in the corners. ‘Could you pass me something to scoop out the rest with?’ I said to Leo. He rose, looked quickly about him and picked up a coffee mug from a table in the corner of the room.

376

He gave it to me and watched as I scraped at the sides and corners. ‘Well, well, well. And just what in consarned tarnation is going on here?’ I looked up in horror. The coffee mug and lens-case fell from my hands and hit the floor with a crash. Brown and Hubbard stood in the doorway. They each held a gun in their hands. ‘Now don’t either of you go moving,’ said Brown moving into the room. ‘I want to find out - Jesus fucking Christ!’ His hand flew to his mouth and he backed away, gagging. I saw vomit leak from between his fingers. The smell had reached Hubbard and I saw him pull a handkerchief from his pocket. I looked at Leo and I saw that he was staring at the black button below the screen ten yards away from us. The clouds of color were still rolling on the screen. Everything was ready. I took a small step to my left towards the machine. ‘Oh, no you don’t/ said Hubbard, handing the handkerchief to Brown. ‘Not one step.’ He raised the hand holding the gun to shoulder height and pointed it straight at my head. Brown wiped his mouth and, still holding the handkerchief against his lips, glared at us with fury and distrust. I felt that for some reason he was more angered by his uncharacteristic outburst of profanity than by the throwing up. I had sensed when we had first met that he set a lot of store by his soft-spoken cowboy image. No doubt his underlings celebrated him as a wonderful eccentric Gary Cooper-like kind of eccentric. Gary Cooper never said ‘Jesus fucking Christ’. At least not in any movie I ever saw.





Unknown




‘I don’t know,’ he said, through the handkerchief, ‘just what sick perversions we have stumbled on here, but I sure as the deuce mean to find out. You stay right where you are, you hear? Don’t say a word. Just nod or shake your head, understood?’

377

Leo and I nodded in unison. ‘Good boys. Now. You got any more of them there masks in this room?’ Leo nodded. ‘Where are they?’ Leo pointed to his pocket. ‘All right now. You reach into that pocket, nice and slow and you throw them to me, okay?’ Leo shook his head and put up a finger. ‘What’s that? You mean you only got one of the suckers?’ Leo nodded. He had thought, I realised, to bring one for Steve, expecting him to be with us for our moment of triumph. ‘Shoot. Well, never mind. You throw that one mask over then.’ Leo did so. Hubbard caught it neatly and passed it to Brown, who gave him in return the vomit-filled handkerchief. Hubbard stared at this offering for a moment and then threw it into the corridor behind him. Brown adjusted the mask over his face and came fully into the room, his gun at hip level. ‘You just make sure these boys are covered/ he said over his shoulder to Hubbard. Hubbard nodded weakly and leaned against the doorframe. The smell was getting to him and he didn’t have a handkerchief. His movement to one side revealed, crouched behind him in the shadows of the opposite doorway, Steve. I swallowed, not daring to look to see if Leo had seen him too. Brown was moving slowly towards us, his eyes darting suspiciously about the room. He was now close enough to see the bowl of rats, maggots, lice and other crawling horrors. ‘Holy dang!’ he said. ‘Just what in the name of heckfire is going on here?’ I stole another look at Hubbard, who was looking at Brown and trying not to breathe. I let my eyes slide slowly over to Steve. He was staring at me, white-faced

378

and frightened. I swallowed again and spoke, as loudly and clearly as I could through the mask. ‘It’s just an experiment,’ I said. ‘What’s that?’ asked Brown. ‘Experiment? What kind of disgusting, God-forsaken, heathen experiment could this ever be, boy? Answer me that?’ ‘All you have to do is press that black button. The one just below that screen there. The black button. Then you’ll find out.’ ‘Oh no, son. No one is going to go pressing any buttons round here until I’ve heard some explanations.’ I flicked my eyes over to Steve again and saw him straighten. He would need a diversion just to start. ‘Explanations?’ I bellowed. ‘Explanations? There’s your explanation … there? I stabbed a finger dramatically towards the far corner of the room. Pathetic really. I mean, talk about the oldest trick in the book. But it’s a good book, and the trick would have been cut from subsequent editions if it didn’t sometimes work. I won’t say it worked this time. Not fully. Brown did look in that direction for a fraction of a second, but that was the extent of it. In that same fraction of a second Steve, God bless him, hurled himself through the doorway, knocking Hubbard sideways, and threw himself almost lengthways at the screen. At the same time, Brown turned and fired his gun. I heard Leo whimper and I heard Hubbard’s body collide with a bookshelf as he tried to regain his balance from Steve’s onslaught. I saw blood and gristle explode from out of the back of Steve’s neck and splatter against the wall. I saw a wisp of blue smoke come from the end of Brown’s gun. And I saw Brown, God rot his soul, raise the muzzle of the gun to his mouth and make to blow the wisp away like the mean, no good gun-slinger he was. The mask was in the way, of course, so the noise that should have gone with the gesture, the little flute of triumph, was missinc

379

And, reader, I saw this. I saw Steve’s flailing hand feel for the little black button below the screen and press it hard with the strength of ten men and I swear, and will swear to my dying day, that as I leaped forwards to catch his falling body, a smile - a radiant smile for me and me alone - flickered on his face as he fell back and died in my arms. Epilogue The event horizon ‘It just doesn’t learn, does it?’ ‘Exactly the same thing last week.’ ‘Next time, it’s shandy or nothing.’ ‘Well, hold him up, Jamie.’ ‘Me? Why should I hold him up? He’s covered in ids.’ ‘Don’t call it ick, darling, that’s so twee.’ ‘Where’s that girl he came with last week? Why can’t she help?’ ‘Oh, don’t you know?’ ‘Know what?’ ‘Dumped him.’ ‘What’s going on?’ ‘Hark!’ ‘She moves, she stirs, she seems to feel, the breath of life beneath her keel.’ ‘Poetry, Eddie?’ ‘And why not?’ ‘Well, what are we going to do with it?’ ‘Mm. No cab is going to accept a mess like this are they?’ ‘Where am I?’ ‘You’re in Cairo, Puppy.’ ‘In the court of Cleopatra.’ ‘You’re my body servant.’ ‘Oh no, I can’t be. Not Cairo.’ ‘Well, Paris then. In Madame de Pompadour’s boudoir.’ ‘Double Eddie?’ ‘Yes, Pups, what is it, sweetie?’

380

‘Is that you? ‘It’s me.’ ‘Tell me something.’ ‘Anything, treasure. Anything.’ ‘Are you gay?’ ‘Oh Christ, he’s really lost it this time.’ ‘Shut your face, Jamie. Yes, Puppy. As gay as life, thank you for asking.’ ‘Thank God …’ ‘Eddie, I swear. If you try to take advantage of him in this state ‘Shush. Look, he’s absolutely completely gone. Conked right out, poor lamb.’ ‘Oh poo. Well I suppose I’d better try and take him home.’ ‘We’ll both go, thank you very much indeed for asking nicely.’ ‘Are you saying you don’t trust me?’ ‘I’m not, but I can if you want me to.’ ‘Morning, Bill.’ ‘Morning, Mr Young, sir.’ ‘This letter in my pigeon-hole. It’s addressed to Professor Zuckermann.’ ‘Just leave it with me, sir. I’ll see that he gets it.’ ‘No, that’s okay. I’ve got to see him anyway. I’ll take the rest of his stuff too.’ ‘Very good, sir.’ ‘Yes, it is, isn’t it? It is very good.’ I walked across the lawn, deciding that I didn’t care a purple sprouting damn whether or not Bill shouted after me to get off the grass. A window was flung open on the first floor and two voices floated down. ‘Well!’ ‘Someone’s very cheerful this morning.’ ‘Considering the state they were in last night.’ ‘Hiya guys,’ I said, with a salute. ‘Great party last night.’ ‘As if he remembers a single moment of it.’ ‘Did one of you take me home and put me to bed?’

381

‘We both did.’ ‘Thanks. I’m sorry I got so wrecked. I’ll see you later.’ I bounded up the stairs to Leo’s rooms and knocked cheerfully on the door. ‘Come in!’ He was standing over his chess-table, staring at the position and tugging at his beard. The blue eyes blinked up in faint surprise as I came in. ‘Professor Zuckermann?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Um, my name’s Young, Michael Young. We’re neighbours.’ ‘Doctor Barmby has moved?’ ‘No, just pigeon-hole neighbours. Young, Zucker-mann. Alphabetic adjacency?’ ‘Oh, yes. I see. Of course.’ ‘Your overspill gets stuffed into mine, so I thought I’d …’ ‘My dear young fellow, how very kind. I am so sadly neglectful of clearing my pigeon-hole, I fear.’ ‘Hey, no trouble. No trouble at all.’ He took the pile of mail from me. I let my eyes wander briefly around the room, taking in the lap-top, the holocaust literature, the mug of chocolate by the chessboard. ‘You look like a coffee man,’ he said. ‘Would you like a cup?’ ‘That’s very kind,’ I said, ‘but I have to be running. Hm.’ I looked down at the chessboard. ‘Are you white or black?’ ‘Black,’ he said. ‘You’re losing then,’ I said. ‘I’m terrible at chess. My friends tease me about it.’ ‘Hey that’s cool. I’m terrible at physics.’ ‘You know my subject?’ He sounded surprised. ‘Just a wild guess.’ ‘And what are you reading?’ I smiled. ‘I know I look too young, but actually I’m just finishing a thesis. History.’ ‘History? Is that so? What period?’

382

‘Oh, no special period.’ He gave me a quick look, as if suspecting me of some student trick. ‘You’ll think me very impertinent,’ I said. ‘But can I give you a word of advice? There is something you absolutely must not do.’ ‘What?’ said Leo, raising his eyebrows in astonishment. ‘What must I absolutely not do?’ I looked into those blue eyes … no, I thought. Not face-toface. Not again. Maybe a letter one day soon. An anonymous letter. ‘Take that pawn,’ I said, pointing down to the chess-table. ‘You’ll walk straight into a fork from the knight and lose the exchange. Anyway, sorry to have troubled you. See you later sometime, maybe.’ I pushed the bike up piss alley towards King’s Parade. I had noticed, after waking up, that the kitchen was low on food. ‘Oh, yes, there was one more thing/ I said to the assistant in the little grocery store opposite Corpus. ‘You don’t have any maple syrup do you?’ ‘Second shelf, love. Just above the Branston.’ ‘Wonderful,’ I said. ‘Goes very well with bacon, you know.’ I thought maybe I might just try the record shop too. OilyMoily’s latest album was due out. ‘Oily-Moily? Never heard of them.’ ‘Don’t be ridiculous,’ I said. ‘I’ve bought their albums here before. Oily-Moily. You know, Pete Braun, Jeff Webb. I mean come on, they’re one of the biggest bands in the world.’ ‘Pete Brown, did you say? I can do you James Brown.’ ‘Not O-W … A-U! Braun. Spelt like the electric shavers.’ ‘Never heard of him.’ I left the shop in a huff. I would return when they had someone with a brain in there. But as I crossed the street a memory returned. A profile in Q Magazine I had read somewhere at some time.

383

Peter Braun’s father was born in Austria, the land of Mozart and Schubert. Maybe that’s why some classical music critics have gone overboard for his songs, making doopy arses of themselves by comparing some of the tracks on Open Wide to Schubert’s Winterreise. One of Doctor Schenck’s patients had been called Braun. Don’t tell me, don’t tell me I can have stopped Oily-Moily from being formed. That would be too cruel. But it didn’t make sense. It had worked. It had all worked. I was back where we had started. The water wasn’t drunk. Hitler was born. I had seen the books on Leo’s shelves. Double Eddie was back where he should be. A hip looking dude with one of those small goatee beards that I had once tried to grow was walking towards me. ‘Excuse me,’ I said. ‘Yeah?’ ‘What do you reckon to Oily-Moily?’ ‘Oily-Moily?’ ‘Yes. What do you think of them?’ ‘Sorry, man …’ he shook his head and walked on. I tried it a few more times, but with no real hope. Oily-Moily, no more. Obliterated. I wound my way back to St Matthew’s, the spring gone from my step. At the gates, I collided with Doctor Fraser-Stuart. ‘Aha!’ he cried. ‘It’s young Young. Well, well, well. And how proceeds the thesis?’ ‘The thesis?’ ‘Curse my hat, damn my socks and call my trousers a fool, don’t give me that innocent look, boy. You promised me your revisions today.’ ‘Oh, right,’ I said. ‘Yeah, right. Absolutely. They’re at my house in Newnham, I was just on my way to go print it out.’ ‘To go print it out? Is this whole country turning American? Very well, then. Go and print it out. I shall expect it this afternoon. Minus sensationalist drivel, if you please.’

384

Back at the house in Newnham, after a doomed search for Oily-Moily CDs and tapes, I sat down and had me a breakfast of fried bacon, not very famous Scotch pancakes, fried eggs (over easy) drenched in a full quarter pint of Vermont maple syrup. Burping contentedly with this happy combination of flavours, I went to my study and switched on the computer. Das Meisterwerk was there. With corrections. All properly done. I started to read it and gave up, frantic with boredom, after the second paragraph. A thought struck me and I switched to my web browser. Once the ppp connection was open, I tapped out http://www.princeton.edu and hunted through the opening page for a directory of students. I came across something calling itself spigot and found the page http:/ /www.princeton.edu/~spigot/pguide/students.html. I tried searching for Burns and, aside from an unexciting list of library books covering the Scottish poet, I got no further. Jane wasn’t there either, but then she could hardly have settled in yet. I closed the connection and thought for a while, feeling suddenly rather alone and empty. Above me I saw the line of books I had used for my thesis. Endless studies of Nazism, academic periodicals on nineteenth century Austro-Hungary, a thick edition of Mein Kampf, bristling with post-it notes. The photograph of Adolf Hitler on the front cover of Alan Bullock’s biography stared at me. I looked back at it. ‘Somehow mein fine Fuhrer,’ I said to him, ‘I let you live. What does that make me? And somehow, because of you, Rudolf Gloder never rose to prominence. What did you do to him? Did he perish in the Night of the Long Knives? Did he turn up with you at that meeting of the puny little German Workers’ Party in the back room of the Munich brewery? Was he about to speak when you rose to your feet and stole his thunder? Did he creep away,

385

ambitions frustrated? Perhaps you never met him at all. Oh no, you were in the same regiment in the first war, weren’t you? Maybe you got him killed somehow. Maybe that was it. But if you knew, if you had the faintest idea with what loathing your name is spoken all over the world, what would that do to you? Would you laugh? Or would you protest? Do they play television programmes for you in hell and make you see how history defeated you? Are you forced to watch films and read books in which all your ideas and all your glory are shown for the vulgar, repulsive drivel they were? Or are you waiting, waiting for another one of you to rise up like vomit? I’m sick of you. Sick of Gloder who never was. Sick of the lot of you. Sick of history. History sucks. It sucks.’ I slammed the book face-down and picked up the phone. ‘What’s the number for international enquiries, please?’ Jane did not, in truth, sound overjoyed to hear from me. On the other hand she didn’t sound too pissed off either. Just faintly bored and faintly amused, as usual. ‘It wouldn’t occur to you, of course, that it’s six o’clock in the morning over here, would it?’ ‘Oh, bugger. I’m sorry, hun. I clean forgot. Shall I call back later?’ ‘Well now that I’m up, I might as well talk to you. I suppose you wrung this number out of Donald, did you? ‘No, no. Donald was staunch. He would have laid down his life to protect you. You know that. I found it out all by myself ‘Oh. What a clever little Puppy we are.’ ‘So, you enjoying yourself then?’ ‘Is that why you rang me, to ask that?’ ‘I miss you, that’s all. I’m lonely.’ ‘Oh, Pup, please don’t work on me. Not over the phone.’ ‘Sorry. No, really I rang to ask if you could do me a favour.’ ‘Is it money?’

386

‘Money? No of course it’s not money! When have I ever asked you for money?’ ‘In chronological order, or order of magnitude?’ ‘Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, I want you to look up a junior year student for me.’ ‘You want me to do what?’ ‘His name is Steve Burns. I thought he was in Dickinson House, but he’s not listed on the web-page. He breakfasts pretty regularly at PJ’s Pancake House on Nassau, and sometimes goes to the A & B for the odd glass of Sam Adams.’ ‘Pup, you’re not telling me you know Princeton? I thought that when you went to Austria last year it was the first time you’d ever been anywhere more exciting than Inverness.’ ‘Oh, I know stuff,’ I said airily. ‘You’d be amazed at what I know. Oh, and if you happen by PJ’s yourself, you might give a message to Jo-Beth. She waitresses there. You might let her know that Ronnie Cain has got the hots for her, but she’s to look out. He’s got crabs. Crabs and a tiny dick. Mind you tell her that.’ ‘Pup, have you been drinking?’ ‘Drinking? Me?’ ‘It was Suicide Sunday yesterday, wasn’t it? Don’t tell me you went to the Seraph Party.’ ‘I might have looked in, yes …’ ‘And drunk one glass of vodka punch and then thrown up all over the lawn just like last week. You go back to bed at once, Pup. By the way, have you finished your thesis yet?’ ‘All done,’ I said, and as I spoke, my hand went to the mouse by the keyboard and I dragged the Meisterwerk file to the trash can. ‘AH finished and done and dusted and done.’ I went to the Special Menu and selected ‘Empty Wastebasket’. The Wastebasket contains i item. It uses 956K of disk space. Are you sure you want to permanently remove it? ‘Oh yes,’ I said, clicking ‘Okay’. ‘All done and dusted. No question.’

387

‘You are drunk. I’ll call you sometime. Just remember, Pup. Stay off the vodka.’ I replaced the receiver and looked at the screen. Well. That was that. A nerd from the computing department could always rescue it if I changed my mind. But I didn’t think that I would change my mind. I picked up the telephone again and dialled. ‘Angus Fraser-Stuart.’ ‘Oh, hello Doctor Fraser-Stuart. It’s Michael Young here.’ ‘How may I serve?’ ‘That thesis of mine ‘You have the corrections for me?’ ‘Well, I know now that you weren’t really doing it justice.’ ‘Your pardon, sir?’ ‘Do you still have it?’ ‘The original? I believe so, yes. In a desk somewhere. Wherefore do we ask?’ ‘Well I wonder, if it isn’t too much bother, if you could take it out and have a look at it.’ He tutted and dropped the phone and I could hear drawers opening, and in the background, strange game- Ian music plinking, plonking and plunking away. ‘I have it before me. What new thing am I supposed to see in it? Are there historical brilliances written in the margin in invisible ink that have only now emerged? What?’ I’m sorry, I should have asked you to do this weeks ago…’ ‘Do what, young Young? My time is not wholly without value.’ ‘If you take the first twenty-four pages ‘First twenty-four pages … yes. Done. Now what? Set them to music? ‘No. What I want you to do is to roll them up very, very tightly until it forms a tube. Then I want you to take that tube and push it right up your fat, vain, complacent arse and keep it there for a week. I think that way you’ll appreciate it more. Good afternoon.’ I dropped the receiver onto its cradle and giggled for a while.

388

The phone rang. I let it ring. I was busy at the computer. Typing out the lyrics of an Oily-Moily number. Maybe I could make my fortune in rock and roll. It was possible. Anything was possible. After fifteen minutes or so, I got up and wandered from room to room. I had always loved this little house. Handy for Grantchester Meadows and the long grass, but not too far from the centre of things, that’s how I’d always thought of it. Yet now it felt miles from anywhere. Or maybe I felt miles from anywhere. What was wrong with me? What was the hole in the middle of me? What was missing? I heard the letter-flap open and close and heard something slap onto the doormat. I went through to investigate. Only the Cambridge Evening News, I saw, peering down. I must remember to cancel that, I told myself. No point wasting money. I stood at the kitchen table and started to clear away the breakfast things. Was this going to be it, then? A lifetime of clearing away one’s own breakfast plates? Place settings for one. Dishwasher set to ‘Economy wash’, vacuum stopper for the wine bottle, sleeping in the middle of the bed. Suddenly a little goblin popped into my head and began to dance. No … it wasn’t possible. I shook my head. The goblin, unconcerned, continued his jig. Look, I said to myself. I’m not even going to give this demonic little sprite the satisfaction of going through and checking. It’s not possible. It is not possible. So there. The goblin’s sharp heels began to cause me pain. Oh, all right, damn it. I’ll show you. It’s nothing. Nothing. I stamped through to the hall, furious with myself for giving in. I bent down, picked up the paper and returned to the kitchen. It’s nothing, I said. It’ll be absolutely nothing.

389

I put the paper down on the table, still not daring to check. But anything to silence that damned persistent goblin. AMNESIA VICTIM ADMITTED TO ADDENBROOKE’s. I really do not know why I am bothering with this, I said to myself. I mean it’s pathetic. Obviously just some sad old wino wanting a bed for the night. Why I should even bother … A student from St John’s College was admitted to Addenbrooke’s Hospital last night, after he was found by Cambridge police wandering around the market-place m a confused state during the early hours of yesterday morning. He was found to be completely sober, but with no idea of who he was. Drugs tests proved negative. The unique aspect of the case is that, while the student (who has not been named until his family have been contacted) is a known undergraduate of St John’s and comes from Yorkshire, he was speaking in what one observer called ‘a completely flawless American accent’. A spokesman for Addenbrooke’s said this morning … I flew to the phonebook. ‘Addenbrooke’s Hospital?’ ‘The student!’ I said breathlessly. ‘The student who came in last night. The amnesiac. I need to speak to him.’ ‘Are you a friend of his?’ ‘Yes,’ I said. ‘A good friend.’ ‘Putting you through …’ ‘Butterworth Ward.’ ‘The student,’ I said. ‘Can I speak to him? The amnesiac’ ‘Are you a friend of his?’ ‘Yes!’ I nearly shouted. ‘I’m his best friend.’ ‘And what is your name, please?’ ‘Young. Can I speak to him?’ ‘I’m afraid he discharged himself a few hours ago.’ ‘What?’ ‘And if you really are his best friend, and you see him, could you persuade him to readmit himself? He is in need of care. You can call the

390

I didn’t listen to the rest. I grabbed my keys and ran to the hallway. It was so simple. I knew what it was that I wanted. So simple. The whole rushing tornado of history funnelled to a single point that stood like an infinitely sharpened pencil hovering over the page of the present. The point was so simple. It was love. There just wasn’t anything else. All the rage and fury and violence and wind of the whirlpool, sucking up so much hope and hurling so many lives apart, in its centre it reached down towards now and towards love. I remembered a story that Leo had told me once. About a father and son, prisoners in Auschwitz, towards the end. They had each agreed, miserable as the rations were, that they would only eat half the food they were given. The rest they would hoard and hide somewhere for the moment they knew might be coming, the moment of the death march into Germany. One evening the son returned from labour and his father called him to his side. ‘My son,’ he said. ‘I have done something very dreadful. The food we have been hoarding …’ ‘What about it?’ said his son, alarmed. ‘A couple arrived yesterday. They had managed somehow to smuggle in a prayerbook. They gave me the prayerbook in exchange for the food.’ And do you know what the son did? He hugged his father to him and they wept with love. And that night, which was Passover, as the father and son read from the book, their whole room celebrated a seder together. I don’t know why I remembered that as I hurried to the hallway. I could have remembered stories where sons killed their fathers for a drink of water. Not every story that matters is a weepy, religious tale of goodness shining out in the dark. It just reminded me of that point. That simple point to which history tends despite its violence, despite itself. Now. Love. That’s all there was.

391

In the past it had been fun for me, but no more. That was history. Maybe it wouldn’t last, maybe it wouldn’t work. But that was the future. Now. Love. I had opened the door and was about to charge from the house when I heard the phone ringing. I stood there for ten seconds undecided. It could be the hospital. Probably just calling me back using caller ID. Should I answer it? Maybe he’s found out my number, though? It wouldn’t be that hard. It could be him … it might be him. I raced back to the study and snatched up the phone. ‘Yes?’ I panted. ‘Is that you?’ ‘It most certainly is me,’ said Fraser-Stuart. ‘Oh, go fuck yourself in chocolate,’ I bellowed and slammed the phone down, disgusted. ‘In chocolate!’ said a voice behind me. ‘You are so weird, Mikey.’ I spun round. He looked a little pale and tired. The hair was longer of course and I noted the beginnings of a small goatee-style beard. ‘The door was open,’ he said apologetically. I stared at him. ‘Well, Mikey? Aren’t you gonna say anything?’ I approached him cautiously, afraid that at any moment he might disappear, that the tide that had flung him towards me would reach out and pull him back. ‘So where’s the Mardi Gras?’ he said. ‘The bookstores? What are we waiting for? Give me some Ecstasy and let’s get out there and dance.’ THE BEGINNING

392





